FIFTH MODIFICATION OF THE DECLARATION OF
A STATE OF EMERGENCY FOR THE

STATE OF DELAWARE DUE TO A PUBLIC HEALTH THREAT

WHEREAS, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) has determined 
that
a novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) presents a serious public health threat; and

WHEREAS, on March 12, 2020 at 3:00 p.m. E.D.T., I issued a Declaration of a 
State of
Emergency due to the public health threat of COVID-19, which became effective 
as of 8:00 a.m.

E.D.T. on March 13, 2020; and

WHEREAS, on March 16, 2020 at 2:00 p.m. E.D.T., I issued the First Modification 
of the
Declaration of a State of Emergency to advise that the CDC issued new guidance 
for large events
and mass gatherings, including conferences, social events, concerts and other 
types of assemblies;
and

WHEREAS, on March 18, 2020 at 2:00 p.m. E.D.T., I issued the Second 
Modification of
the Declaration of a State of Emergency to further restrict events and 
gatherings; to restrict food
service  to  only  take-out  or  delivery;  to  close  casinos,  bowling  
alleys,  concert  venues,  movie
theaters, sports facilities, fitness centers and health spas; to ensure 
additional precautions in nursing
homes,  retirement  facilities,  or  assisted-living  facilities;  to  promote  
authority  to  the  Delaware


Emergency Management Agency and the Division of Public Health to cancel any 
gatherings for
public health reasons; to authorize the Secretary of Labor to develop emergency 
rules relating to
unemployment insurance; to address requirements for telemedicine services; and 
to address the
sale of alcoholic beverages; and

WHEREAS, on March 21, 2020 at 12:00 p.m. E.D.T., I issued the Third 
Modification of
the Declaration of a State of Emergency to close all Delaware beaches, except 
to persons using the
beaches for exercise or to walk their dogs, subject to certain precautions 
recommended by the CDC
on COVID-19, which became effective as of 5:00 p.m. E.D.T.; and

WHEREAS, on March 22, 2020 at 4:00 p.m. E.D.T., I issued the Fourth 
Modification of
the Declaration of a State of Emergency; and

WHEREAS, because of the risk of the rapid spread of the virus, and the need to 
protect
all Delaware citizens, especially health care providers and citizens most 
vulnerable to the virus,
additional efforts are needed to mitigate community spread of COVID-19; and

WHEREAS, it is critical to ensure that law enforcement and public and private 
health
resources  not  be  unnecessarily  diverted  from  responding  to  
COVID-19-related  issues  and
maintaining public safety and health; and

WHEREAS, Delawareans should refrain from organizing or attending social 
gatherings
of any size, except for regular interactions with immediate family members, 
members of the same
household, caregivers, or individuals with whom you have a close personal 
relationship; and

WHEREAS, requiring all individuals located in Delaware to shelter in place—that 
is, to
stay at home or at their place of residence—except with respect to certain 
essential activities and
to work to provide essential business and government services, is in the 
interests of preserving
public safety and health and limiting community spread of COVID-19.


NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOHN C. CARNEY, pursuant to Title 20, Chapter 31 of the
Delaware  Code,  do  hereby  declare  that  the  Declaration  of  a  State  of  
Emergency,  as  modified
through the First Modification, the Second Modification, the Third 
Modification, and the Fourth
Modification shall remain in effect until further notice, with the following 
modifications:

1.   Shelter in  place  of residence. Effective March  24, 2020 at 8:00  a.m.  
E.D.T.,  with the

exceptions as outlined below, all individuals currently living within the State 
of Delaware
are ordered to shelter in place, at their home or place of residence except as 
permitted in
this  Fifth  Modification  of  the  Declaration  of  a  State  of  Emergency.   
 To  the  extent
individuals are using shared or outdoor space when outside their residence, 
they must at all
times and as much as reasonably possible maintain social distancing of at least 
 six feet
from any other person, consistent with the Social Distancing Requirements set 
forth in this
Fifth Modification of the Declaration of a State of Emergency and with the 
guidelines set
by the CDC. All persons may leave their homes or places of residence only for 
Essential
Activities or Essential Travel, as defined below.

2.   Individuals experiencing homelessness are strongly urged to find shelter, 
and government
agencies  are  urged  to  take  steps  needed  to  provide  shelter  for  those 
 individuals,  in
accordance with CDC guidance. Homeless individuals are otherwise  not subject 
to  this
shelter   in place order.

3.   Individuals whose residences are unsafe or  become unsafe, such as victims 
of domestic
violence, are permitted and urged to leave their homes and stay at a safe 
alternative home
or residence.

4.   Individuals at high risk of severe illness from COVID-19 and people who 
are sick are urged
to stay in their residences to the extent possible except as necessary to seek 
medical care.


Nothing in this Fifth Modification of the Declaration of a State of Emergency 
prevents
DEMA from issuing and enforcing isolation and quarantine orders pursuant to 20 
Del. C.

§ 3136 or DPH from issuing and enforcing isolation and quarantine orders 
pursuant to 16
Del. C. § 505.

5.   For purposes of this Fifth Modification of the Declaration of a State of 
Emergency, homes
and residences include hotels, motels, shared rental units, shelters and 
similar facilities.

6.   Prohibited and permitted travel. All travel (including, but not limited 
to, travel on foot,

bicycle, scooter, motorcycle, automobile, and public transit), except Essential 
Travel or
travel  for  Essential  Activities,  as  defined  below,  is  prohibited.  
Passengers  traveling  by
public  transit  must  comply  with  Social  Distancing  Requirements  to  the  
greatest  extent
feasible.

7.   Leaving your home or residence for Essential Activities is permitted. 
Individuals may

only leave their residence to carry out Essential Activities or Essential 
Travel.  For purposes
of this Order, Essential Activities are defined as follows:

a.   To engage in activities or perform tasks essential to their health and 
safety, or to
the  health  and  safety  of  their  family  or  household  members  
(including,  but  not
limited to, pets), such as, by way of example only and without limitation, 
obtaining
medical supplies  or medication, visiting a health care professional, or 
obtaining
supplies they need to work from home.

b.   To  obtain  necessary  services  or  supplies  for  themselves  and  their 
 family  or
household members, or to deliver those services or supplies to others, such as, 
 food
supplies, dry goods, pet supplies and any other household consumer products, 
and


products  necessary  to  maintain  the  safety,  sanitation,  and  essential  
operation  of
residences.

c.   To  engage  in  outdoor  activity,  providing  the  individuals  comply  
with  Social
Distancing  Requirements,  as  defined  below,  such  as,  by  way  of  example 
 and
without  limitation,  walking,  running,  biking,  or  fishing.   Individuals  
may  go  to
public parks and open outdoor recreation areas (except beaches, which may be 
used
only  as  described  in  my  Third  Modification  of  the  Declaration  of  a  
State  of
Emergency).

d.   To perform work permitted by the Fourth Modification of the Declaration of 
a State
of Emergency.

e.   To care for a family member, friend, or pet in another household, and to 
transport
family members, friends, pets, or livestock as allowed by this Order.

8.   Leaving your home or residence for Essential Travel is permitted. For the 
purposes of

this  Order,  Essential  Travel  includes  travel  for  any  of  the  purposes  
set  forth  in  this
paragraph.  Individuals  engaged  in  any  Essential  Travel  must  comply  
with  all  Social
Distancing Requirements.

a.   Any travel related to the provision of or access to Essential Activities 
or Minimum
Basic Operations.

b.   Travel to care for elderly persons, minors, dependents, persons with 
disabilities,
other vulnerable persons, pets, or livestock.

c.   Travel to or from educational institutions for purposes of receiving 
materials for
distance learning, for receiving meals, and for receiving any other related 
services.

d.   Travel to return to a place of residence in Delaware from outside the 
jurisdiction.


e.   Travel required or authorized by a law enforcement officer or court order.

f.    Travel required for non-residents to return to their place of residence 
outside the
State.

9.   Social  distancing  measures  are  required.  For  the  purposes  of  this 
 Order,  “Social

Distancing  Requirements”  include  maintaining  at  least  six-foot  social  
distancing  from
individuals, washing hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds as 
frequently as
possible or using hand sanitizer, covering coughs or sneezes (not with hands), 
regularly
cleaning high-touch surfaces, and not shaking hands. These requirements 
incorporate any
subsequent guidance from the CDC issued after the issuance of this Order.

10. Minimum Basic Operations. For the purposes of this Order, Minimum Basic 
Operations

include the following, provided that employees comply with the Fourth 
Modification of
the Declaration of a State of Emergency and Social Distancing Requirements, to 
the extent
possible, while carrying out such operations:

a.   The minimum necessary activities to maintain the value of the business’s 
inventory,
preserve  the  condition  of  the  business’s  physical  plant  and  equipment, 
 ensure
security, process payroll and employee benefits, or for related functions.

b.   The minimum necessary activities to facilitate employees of the business 
being able
to work remotely or continue to work remotely from their residences.

11. Intent of this Order. The intent of this Order is to ensure that the 
maximum number of

people  self-isolate  in  their  places  of  residence  to  the  extent  
feasible,  while  enabling
essential services to continue, in order to slow the spread of COVID-19 to the 
maximum
extent possible. When people need to leave their places of residence, whether 
to obtain or
perform  essential  services,  or  to  otherwise  facilitate  Essential  
Activities  and  Minimum


Basic Operations necessary for continuity of social and commercial life, they 
should at all
times reasonably possible comply with Social Distancing Requirements.  All 
provisions of
this Fifth Modification of the Declaration of a State of Emergency should be 
interpreted to
effectuate this intent.

12. Testing: All COVID-19 testing shall be made available to those persons who 
meet

criteria for such testing as established and modified from time to time, by the 
CDC.  All
health care providers, facilities and entities that decide to offer testing 
shall make that
testing available to any person presenting at the testing site who meets the 
CDC criteria
without regard to that person’s ability to pay, type of health insurance, or 
participation in
any particular provider network. Health care providers shall provide testing to 
the extent
that testing costs are not covered by the payments by individuals and health 
insurance
carriers and will be covered by Delaware’s Health Care Connection Program.

13. Enforcement.   This Order has the force and effect of law.   Any failure to 
comply with the

provisions  contained  in  a  Declaration  of  a  State  of  Emergency  or  any 
 modification  to  a
Declaration of a State of Emergency constitutes a criminal offense. 20 Del. C. 
§§ 3115 (b);
3116 (9); 3122; 3125. State and local law enforcement agencies are authorized 
to enforce the
provisions of any Declaration of a State of Emergency.

APPROVED this 22d day of March 2020 at 4:02 p.m.

Governor

