EMERGENCY ORDER OF LOCAL HEALTH OFFICER


Emergency Public Health Order issued on this 22nd day of March 2020 to mitigate 
the
spread of the Coronavirus (CO V ID-19) epidemic in Douglas County, Kansas, 
pursuant to the
authority provided in K.S.A. 65-119, K.S.A. 65-129b and K.S.A. 65-202 and other 
applicable
laws or regulations.


WHEREAS, the Local Health Officer is authorized and required, pursuant to 
K.S.A. 65-
119,  K.S.A. 65-129b and K.S.A. 65-202 to immediately exercise and maintain a 
supervision
over known or suspected cases of any infectious or contagious disease during 
its continuance,
and to issue orders seeing that all such cases are properly handled and that 
the provisions of the
Kansas public health laws as to isolation, quarantine and disinfection are duly 
enforced; and

WHEREAS, the Local Health Officer is appointed by the Board of Health and is
authorized to prohibit public gatherings when necessary for the control of any 
and all infectious
or contagious diseases, pursuant to K.S.A. 65-119; and

WHEREAS on the 18th day of March 2020, the Board of County Commissioners of
Douglas County, Kansas found that a disaster had occurred, or the threat 
thereof was imminent
within Douglas County, Kansas as a result of the Coronavirus pandemic (CO 
VID-19) and the
confirmed outbreak and person-to-person spread of COVID-19 in the United States 
and Kansas;
and

WHEREAS, COVID-19, is a respiratory disease that spreads easily from person to
person and may result in serious illness or death, has been confirmed in Kansas 
and in Douglas
County, resulting in serious illness and at least two deaths to date in Kansas; 
and

WHEREAS, such conditions endanger health, safety and welfare of persons and 
property
within the border of Douglas County, Kansas; and

WHEREAS, to reduce spread of COVID- 19, the United States Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), the Kansas Department of Health and Environment 
(KDHE) and
the Douglas County Local Health Officer, all recommend implementation of 
community
mitigation strategies to increase containment of the virus, including 
cancellation of large
gatherings and social distancing in smaller gatherings; and

WHEREAS, the worldwide outbreak of COVID-19 and the resulting epidemic in Kansas
and Douglas County continue to threaten the life and health of our citizens and 
visitors as well as
the economy and remains a public disaster affecting life, health, property and 
the public peace.

WHEREAS, this public health order directing individuals to stay at home is 
being issued
to slow the rate of community spread of COVID-19 through intensified social 
distancing. It is


estimated that each COVID-19 positive patient could infect between 2.6 to 4 
other people.
Furthermore, there is emerging evidence in neighboring counties, including 
Johnson County,
Kansas, of transmission by pre-symptomatic and asymptomatic people, making 
routine case-
finding and exposure tracing strategies insufficient. Social distancing 
strategies are effective
when implemented early enough-- ideally within two weeks of the first case and 
are key to
flattening the epidemic curve to prevent overwhelming our local health care 
system’s ability to
care for the proportion of residents who develop severe symptoms. Despite 
recent enactment of
Public Health Orders (schools, bars and restaurants), lack of available metrics 
to monitor the
effect of these measures and the potential dire consequences of delay led the 
public health
community across metropolitan Kansas City and elected officials to conclude 
that further delay
could lead to excess mortality. Early implementation of this strategy is even 
more important in
the context of limited testing capacity, as is the case in the Kansas City 
area. With full

community cooperation, this proactive public health order can minimize the 
impact of COVID-19
on our Douglas County community.

Section One:  Definitions and Exemptions

a. For purposes of this Order, Social Distancing Requirements means maintaining 
at least
six-foot social distancing from other individuals, washing hands with soap and 
water for at least
twenty seconds as frequently as possible or using hand sanitizer, covering 
coughs or sneezes (into
the sleeve or elbow, not hands), regularly cleaning high-touch surfaces, and 
not shaking hands.

b. For purposes of this Order individuals are directed to stay at home and 
leave their
residence only to perform any of the following “Essential Activities” as 
described below.   People
at   high risk of severe illness from COVID-19 and people who are sick are 
urged to stay in their
residence except as necessary to seek medical care.

i. To engage in activities or perform tasks essential to their health and 
safety, or to the health
and safety of their family or household members (including, but not limited to, 
pets), such
as, by way of example only and without limitation, obtaining medical supplies or
medication, or visiting a health care professional;

ii. To obtain necessary services or supplies for themselves and their family or 
household
members, to obtain supplies they need to work from home, or to deliver those 
services or
supplies   to others, such as, by way of example only and without limitation, 
canned food, dry
goods, fresh fruits and vegetables, pet supplies, fresh meats, fish, and 
poultry, and any other
household and personal consumer products, and products necessary to maintain 
the safety,
sanitation, and essential operation of residences;

iii. To engage in outdoor activity, provided the individuals comply with Social 
Distancing
Requirements as defined in this Section, such as, by way of example and without 
limitation,
walking, hiking, or running. Use of parks and other public areas are permitted. 
 Use of
playground and exercise equipment, however, is discouraged;

iv. To perform work providing essential products and services at an Essential 
Business or to
otherwise carry out activities specifically permitted in this Order, including 
Minimum Basic
Operations;


v. To care for a family member or pet in another household, or engage in 
transportation or to
transport the family member or pet to provide for such care;

vi. To comply with valid court or administrative orders;

vii. To work for or obtain services at any “Healthcare Operations” including 
hospitals, clinics,
dentists,   pharmacies,   pharmaceutical   and   biotechnology   companies,   
other   healthcare
facilities, healthcare suppliers, home healthcare services providers, mental 
health providers
including pastoral or other counselors, intellectual/developmental disability 
providers, or any
related and/or ancillary healthcare services. “Healthcare Operations” also 
includes veterinary
care  and  all  healthcare  services  provided  to  animals.  This  exemption  
shall  be  construed
broadly  to  avoid  any  impacts  to  the  delivery  of  healthcare,  broadly  
defined.  “Healthcare
Operations” does not include activities at fitness and exercise gyms and 
similar facilities;

viii.  To  provide  any  services  or  perform  any  work  necessary  to  the  
operations  and
maintenance  of  “Essential  Infrastructure,”  including,  but  not  limited  
to,  public  works
construction, construction or repair of housing (in particular affordable 
housing or housing
for  individuals  experiencing  homelessness),  commercial  construction,  
airport  operations,
water, sewer, gas, electrical, oil refining, roads and highways, public 
transportation, solid
waste  collection  and  removal,  internet,  and  telecommunications  systems  
(including  the
provision  of  essential  global,  national,  and  local  infrastructure  for  
computing  services,
business infrastructure, communications, and web-based services), provided that 
they carry
out those services or that work in compliance with Social Distancing 
Requirements as defined
this Section, to the extent possible.

c. For purposes of this Order, all first responders, public health, emergency 
management
personnel, essential responders to the County’s emergency operations center, 
emergency
dispatchers,      court personnel, and law enforcement personnel, and others 
working for or to support
Essential Businesses are categorically exempt from this Order. Further, nothing 
in this Order shall
prohibit any individual from performing or accessing “Essential Governmental 
Functions” provided
said individuals perform these duties following the guidance of the Local 
Health Officer or
delegated public health personnel. Essential Governmental Functions means all 
services needed to
ensure the continuing operation of the government agencies and provide for the 
health, safety and
welfare of the public, including judicial functions. All Essential Governmental 
Functions shall be
performed in compliance with Social Distancing Requirements as defined this 
Section, to the extent
possible.

d. For the purposes of this Order, covered businesses include any for-profit, 
non-profit, or
educational entities, regardless of the nature of the service, the function 
they perform, or its
corporate or entity structure.

e. For the purposes of this Order, “Essential Businesses” means:

i.          Healthcare Operations, Essential Infrastructure and Essential 
Government
Functions;


ii.         Grocery stores, certified farmers’ markets, farm and produce 
stands, supermarkets,
food banks, convenience stores, and other establishments engaged in the retail 
sale of
canned food, dry goods, fresh fruits and vegetables, pet supply, fresh meats, 
fish, and
poultry, alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages, and any other household 
consumer products
(such as cleaning and personal care products). This includes stores that sell 
or distribute
groceries and other non-grocery products, and products or services necessary to 
maintaining
the safety, sanitation, and essential operation of residences; however, the 
touching of
unpacked baked goods is prohibited.

iii.        Food cultivation, including farming, livestock, and fishing;

iv.        Human and animal food processing facilities and facility workers;

v.         Businesses that provide food, shelter, and social services, and 
other necessities of
life for economically disadvantaged or otherwise needy individuals;

vi.        Newspapers, television, radio, and other media services;

vii.       Gas stations and auto-supply, auto-repair and servicing, emergency 
road services
and related services and facilities;

viii.      Banks and related financial institutions;

ix.        Hardware stores;

x.         Plumbers, electricians, exterminators, construction, cleaning and 
janitorial staff,,
security staff, HVAC, painting, moving and relocation services, lawn care and
landscaping and other trades and service providers who provide services that are
necessary     to maintaining the safety, sanitation, and essential operation of 
residences,
Essential Activities, and Essential Businesses;

xi.        Businesses providing mailing and shipping services, including post 
office boxes;

xii.       Educational institutions, which includes public and private K-12 
schools, colleges,
and universities, for purposes of facilitating distance learning or performing 
essential
functions related to distance learning and support to other essential 
businesses (such
as transportation and law enforcement), provided that social distancing of 
six-feet
per person is maintained to the greatest extent possible.  School buildings may 
be
used if needed to house individuals, distribute food, provide medical care, 
distance
learning or any other services deemed necessary to protect the life and 
property and
other critical resources. This Order does not supersede or amend Paragraph 1 of 
the
Emergency Order of Local Health Officer for Schools dated March 16, 2020;

xiii.      Laundromats, dry cleaners, and laundry service providers;

xiv.      Restaurants and other facilities that prepare and serve food and/or 
beverages, but
only for delivery or carry out and not for consumption on the premises. Schools 
and
other entities that typically provide free food services to students or members 
of the
public may continue to do so under this Order on the condition that the food is


provided to students or members of the public on a pick-up and takeaway basis 
only.
Schools and other entities that provide food services under this exemption 
shall not
permit the food to be eaten at the site where it is provided, or at any other 
gathering
site;

xv.       Businesses that supply products and services needed for people to 
work from home;

xvi.      Businesses that supply other Essential Businesses with the support or 
supplies
necessary to operate;

xvii.     Businesses that ship or deliver groceries, food, beverages, goods or 
services directly
to residences;

xviii.    Taxis, aircraft, commercial transportation and logistics providers 
and services and
other transportation providers providing transportation services necessary for
Essential Activities and other purposes expressly authorized in this Order;

xix.      Home-based care for seniors, adults, or children;

xx.       Residential facilities and shelters for seniors, adults, and 
children;

xxi.      Professional services, such as legal services, accounting services, 
real estate services,
and insurance services;

xxii.     Childcare facilities providing services that enable employees 
exempted in this Order
to work as permitted. To the extent possible, childcare facilities shall 
operate under
the following conditions:

1.         Childcare must be carried out in stable groups of 10 or fewer 
(“stable” means
that the same 10 or fewer children are in the same group each day);

2.         Children shall not change from one group to another;

3.         If more than one group of children is cared for at one facility, 
each group
shall be in a separate room. Groups shall not mix with each other; and

4.         Childcare providers shall remain solely with one group of children.

xxiii.    Mortuary, cremation, and burial services.

xxiv.    Hotels and motels, to the extent used for lodging and delivery or 
carry-out food
services.

xxv.     Manufacturing companies, distributors, and supply chain companies 
producing and
supplying essential products and services in and for residences and industries 
such as
pharmaceutical, technology, biotechnology, healthcare, chemicals and sanitation,
waste pickup and disposal, agriculture, food and beverage, transportation, 
energy,
steel and steel products, petroleum, lubricants and fuel, mining, construction,
national defense, communications, as well as products and services used by
Essential Businesses.


Section Two. Essential Businesses shall take proactive measures to ensure 
compliance with
Social Distancing Requirements, including where possible:

i.          Designate six-foot distances. Designating with signage, tape, or by 
other means six-
foot spacing for employees and customers in line to maintain appropriate 
distance;

ii.         Hand sanitizer and sanitizing products. Having anti-microbial soap 
and water or
hand sanitizer and sanitizing products readily available for employees and
customers;

iii.        Separate operating hours for vulnerable populations. Implementing 
separate
operating hours for elderly and vulnerable customers; and

iv.       Online and remote access. Posting online whether a facility is open 
and how best to
reach the facility and continue services by phone or remotely.

Section Three. All large public gatherings of people in the County are 
prohibited unless
otherwise ordered by the Public Health Board or by the local health officer. 
Large public
gatherings are those with more than ten (10) people in attendance or 
anticipated to attend, both
indoor and outdoor, except for Essential Businesses.  A "gathering" does not 
include normal
operations at spaces where persons may be in transit or coming and going 
individually or in
groups     of less than ten (10) persons. For all gatherings of people, the 
health officer strongly
encourages everyone to follow the guidance provided by the Centers for Disease 
Control and
Prevention (CDC), and federal, state and local public health officials and 
private medical
providers.

Section Four. Pursuant to K.S.A. 65-129b, any sheriff, deputy sheriff or other 
law
enforcement officer of the state or any political subdivision within Douglas 
County, Kansas
is hereby ordered to assist in the execution or enforcement of this order.

Section Five. This Order may be supplemented or modified as required for the 
effective and
efficient management and control of the Coronavirus epidemic in the County by 
further
order or direction of the Douglas County Board of Public Health or by the 
Douglas County
Local Health Officer.

Section Six.  This Order is effective at 12:01 a.m. on Tuesday, March 24, 2020 
and shall
remain in effect for 30 days, until 12:01 a.m. on Thursday, April 23, 2020, 
unless sooner
amended, superseded, or rescinded.

IT IS SO ORDERED THIS 22ND DAY OF MARCH, 2020

Dr. Thomas Marcellino
Local Health Officer
Douglas County, Kansas

