PROCLAMATION DECLARING

CONTINUED STATE OF EMERGENCY
AND

REQUIREMENT TO STAY AT HOME

WHEREAS,   there   is   currently   an   outbreak   of   novel   coronavirus   
disease   2019
(“COVID-19”), a respiratory illness, first detected in Wuhan City, Hubei 
Province, China, and it
continues to expand to a growing number of international locations, including 
the United States;
and

WHEREAS,  on  January  31,  2020,  the  United  States  Secretary of Health  
and Human
Services announced a nationwide public health emergency to respond to COVID-19; 
and

WHEREAS, on March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (the “WHO”) declared
that global health crisis involving COVID-19 is a pandemic; and

WHEREAS,  on March 12, 2020, the State  of  Maine identified and confirmed its  
first
case of COVID-19; and

WHEREAS, on March 13, 2020, the City of Portland, Maine identified and confirmed
its first case of COVID-19; and

WHEREAS, on March 16, 2020, the City of Portland declared an emergency and 
issued
an  emergency  proclamation  wherein  in,  among  other  things,  restaurants  
and  bars  were  to be
closed for in-person gatherings and only open for take-out dining; and

WHEREAS, on March 19, 2020 the Federal  Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
Security
Agency  issued  guidance  identifying  14  critical  infrastructure  sectors  
whose  workers  provide
services  and  functions  that  are  essential  to  maintain  in  order  to 
support a strong response  to
COVID-19 pandemic; and

WHEREAS, as of  March 24, 2020, there are 118 cases in  the State  of Maine, 
and 74
cases in Cumberland County of COVID-19; and

WHEREAS, the City of  Portland is the  largest city  in Cumberland County, and 
is the
service center for the region; and

WHEREAS,   COVID-19   has   been   detected   in   hundreds   of   thousands  
of  people
worldwide and is primarily spread from person to person; and


WHEREAS,  COVID-19  is  easily  transmitted,  especially  in  group  settings,  
and  it  is
essential that the spread of the virus be slowed to protect the ability of 
public and private health
care providers to handle the influx of new patients and safeguard public health 
and safety; and

WHEREAS, this worldwide outbreak of  COVID-19 is emerging and rapidly evolving;

and

WHEREAS,  Governor  Janet  T.  Mills  issued  an  executive  order  on  March  
15,  2020
prohibiting  gatherings  of  more  than  ten  (10)  people  throughout  the  
State,  and  closing  all
restaurants and bars dine-in facilities; and

WHEREAS, on March 24, 2020, Governor Mills issued further guidance to businesses
and the public regarding COVID-19;

WHEREAS, under conditions of this emergency, the City of Portland recommends and
encourages all landlords throughout the City to not undertake or process any 
evictions; and

WHEREAS,  the  City  of   Portland  also  recommends  that  persons  not  
advertise  or
encourage the use  or rental  of short-term rentals  throughout the City for 
vacation purposes  or
otherwise; and

WHEREAS, as the City Manager, I have identified additional services and 
functions that
likewise are essential to  promote the public  health, safety  and welfare  of 
the City of Portland,
and therefore it is imperative to ensure workers providing critical services 
and functions in those
designated  sectors  may  continue  to  work  to  ensure  community  resilience 
 and  continuity  of
response  efforts,  and  while  at  the  same time continue to encourage social 
 distancing at  these
services, no in-person dining, and curbside pick-up of any goods where 
practicable;

NOW THEREFORE, pursuant to the  powers  vested in me through  the statutes of 
the
State of Maine;  the Portland City Code, Chapter 2, sections 2-406 and 2-408; 
the City Charter;
and common law authority  to protect  the public’s  health, safety and welfare 
in the event of an
emergency, I, Jon  P. Jennings, City Manager  for the City of Portland, in 
consultation with the
Mayor and City Council of the City of Portland, do hereby declare and order as 
follows:

1.         A civil state of emergency continues to exist within the City of 
Portland.

2.         This Proclamation is issued in accordance with, and incorporates by 
reference, the
March 15, 2020 Executive Order issued by Governor Janet T. Mills.  More

specifically, the following provisions should still be complied with within the 
City
of Portland:

A.        Gatherings of more than ten (10) people are prohibited throughout the
State.  Gatherings subject to the Governor's Executive Order are those that
are primarily social, personal, and discretionary events other than

employment.  Such gatherings include, without limitation, community,


civic, public, leisure, and faith-based events; social clubs; sporting events
with spectators; concerts, conventions, fundraisers, parades, fairs, and
festivals; and any similar event or activity in a venue such as an

auditorium, stadium, arena, large conference room, meeting hall, theatre,
gymnasium, fitness center or private club; and

B.        All restaurants and bars shall close their dine-in facilities.  Such 
businesses
that offer carry-out, delivery, and drive-through food and beverage service
may continue to do so but eating and drinking inside restaurants and bars
is still temporarily prohibited.

3.         The  business, production  and service sectors identified in  
Exhibit A are hereby
designated as “COVID-19 Essential Services.”  I shall amend and publish updates
to  Exhibit A as I determine necessary in response to conditions as they 
develop.

4.         All individuals  currently living within the City of Portland are 
ordered to stay at
their  place  of  residence.   To  the extent individuals  are using shared or  
outdoor
spaces, they must at all times as reasonably possible maintain social 
distancing of
at  least  six  (6)  feet  from  any  other  person  with  whom  they  don’t  
share  a
household  when  they are outside their  residence.    All persons may  leave 
their
residences only to access COVID-19 Essential Services or as otherwise expressly
provided  herein.   Individuals  experiencing  homelessness  are  exempt  from  
this
requirement,  but are strongly urged  to obtain  shelter, and be at least six 
(6) feet
from any other person, to the maximum extent practicable and possible.

5.         All   travel   including,   but   not   limited   to,   travel   on  
 foot,   bicycle,   scooter,
motorcycle,  golf  carts,  automobile,  or  public  transit,  for  COVID-19  
Essential
Services  is permitted.   Outdoor  exercise and/or dog walking is  also 
specifically
permitted.  All  individuals  are  encouraged  to  not  use  or  congregate  on 
 City
playgrounds,  and   it  is   recommend  that   all   individuals  should   
seek,  to  the
maximum extent possible,  to be at  least six (6) feet from any other person 
with
whom they do not share a household with when engaged in any travel or exercise
activities on City streets, trails, grounds, fields, tennis or basketball 
courts or other
outdoor areas.

6.         The requirements in Paragraphs 4 and 5, above, shall not apply to 
police officers,
peace  officers,  firefighters,  EMS,  or  other  emergency  personnel  or  
civilians
engaged in police or emergency work, persons performing essential governmental
functions,  nor  shall  it  apply  to health-care providers or workers  
traveling to  or
coming from work assignments in hospitals or other health-care facilities 
whether
in  or outside of the City of Portland.  Those requirements shall also not 
apply to
authorized representatives of  any news service, newspaper or radio or 
television
station or network.


7.         All  businesses  with  a   facility  in  the  City  of  Portland  
that  do  not  provide
COVID-19 Essential Services, shall close their physical workspaces and 
facilities
(“brick-and-mortar  premises”)  to  workers,  customers,  and  the  public  as  
of  the
effective  date  and  time  of  this  proclamation.   Businesses  that  do  not 
 provide
COVID-19  Essential  Services  are  encouraged  to  continue  operations  
through
remote  means  that  do not  require workers,  customers, or the  public to  
enter or
appear  at  the  brick-and-mortar  premises  closed  pursuant  to  this  
proclamation.
With   that   said,  such   non-essential  businesses  may  continue  to  
access  their
brick-and-mortar   premises   in   order   to  conduct  essential  business  
functions
including,  but  not  limited  to,  processing  mail,  depositing  checks,  
completing
payroll and  paying vendors; as  long as  social distancing requirements are 
being
implemented, and the fewest number of employees possible are on premises when
conducting  such  services.    Churches,  temples,  mosques,  and  other  
places  of
worship   shall   not   be   required   to  close  their   brick-and-mortar  
premises  to
employees  or  to  the  public;  provided,  however,  that  such  institutions  
shall  be
required  to  comply  with  all  limitations  on  gatherings  established  by  
Governor
Janet T. Mills’ March 15, 2020 executive order outlined in paragraph 2 above.

9.         All businesses providing COVID-19 Essential Services  are strongly 
encouraged
to  remain  open.   To  the  greatest extent feasible, COVID-19 Essential  
Services
shall comply with social distancing protocols by maintaining at least six (6) 
feet
of  physical distance from  other people, including other employees and members
of  the public,  including, but not limited  to, when any customers are 
standing in
line, and allow and encourage remote working where practical.

10.       This proclamation shall be effective as of March 25, 2020 5:00 p.m.

11.       As per Chapter 2, section 2-407, this order shall remain in effect 
for five (5) days
unless and until it is renewed by the Portland City Council.

12.       Violation  of  or  failure  to  comply  with  this  Order  is  
punishable  by  a  fine  of

$500.00 per occurrence plus the costs of prosecution.

13.       If  any  provision   of  this   Proclamation  or  its   application  
to  any  person  or
circumstance is held to be invalid, then the remainder of the Order, including 
the
application of such part or provision to other persons or circumstances, shall 
not
be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.  To this end, the 
provisions
of this Proclamation are severable.

Dated:                                                                          
                                                                        

Jon P. Jennings, City Manager


 EXHIBIT A

COVID-19 Essential Services include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Health care operations and pharmacies;

2. Grocery stores, certified farmers’ markets, farm and produce stands, 
supermarkets, food
banks, convenience stores, and other establishments engaged in the retail sale 
of canned food,
dry goods, fresh fruits and vegetables, pet supply, fresh meats, fish, and 
poultry, and any other
household consumer products (such as cleaning and personal care products).  
This includes
stores    that sell groceries and also sell other non-grocery products, and 
products necessary to
maintaining the safety, sanitation, and essential operation of residences;

3. Food cultivation and processing, including farming, livestock, and fishing;

4. Businesses and organizations that provide food, shelter, medical, and social 
services, and
other necessities of life for economically disadvantaged or otherwise needy or 
homeless
individuals, and any associated parking in a parking garage that is related to 
these services;

5. Newspapers, television, radio, and other media services;

6. Gas stations and auto-supply, auto-repair, and related facilities;

7. Banks and related financial institutions;

8. Hardware and building material stores;

9. Plumbers, electricians, exterminators, building cleaning and maintenance, 
and other service
providers who provide services that are necessary to maintaining the safety, 
sanitation, and
essential operation of residences and essential businesses;

10.       Businesses and organizations providing mailing and shipping services, 
including post
office boxes;

11.        Colleges, universities, community colleges, trade schools, and other 
schools exclusively
for the purposes of facilitating distance learning, no in-person instruction is 
authorized;

12.        Laundromats, dry cleaners, and laundry service providers;

13.        Businesses that manufacture or supply products needed for people to 
work from home;

14.        Businesses that manufacture or supply other essential businesses 
with the support or
supplies necessary to operate;


15.        Businesses that ship or deliver groceries, food, goods or services 
directly to residences;

16.        Airlines, taxis, public transportation, marine transport, and any 
other transportation
providers providing transportation services necessary for purposes expressly 
authorized in this
Proclamation;

17.        Home-based care for seniors, adults, or children;

18.        Residential facilities, housing authorities, and homeless and other 
shelters for seniors,
adults, and children;

19.        Professional services, such as legal or accounting services, when 
necessary to assist in
compliance with legally mandated activities;

20.        Childcare facilities providing services that enable employees of 
Essential Services as
defined herein to work as permitted.  To the extent possible, childcare 
facilities are
recommended to operate under the following conditions:   Childcare should be 
carried out in
stable groups of 10 or fewer (“stable” means that the same 10 or fewer children 
are in the
same group each day); Children should not change from one group to another; If 
more than
one group of children is cared for at one facility, each group should be in a 
separate room.
Groups should not mix with each other; and Childcare providers should remain 
solely with
one group of children.

21.        Medical marijuana facilities;

22.        Funeral homes, crematoriums and cemeteries;

23.        Animal shelters, veterinary clinics, animal feed and pet supply 
stores;

24.       The State or Federal Judicial Branch;

25.        Government facilities, agencies, and services needed to ensure the 
continuing operation
of the government and provide for the public health, safety and welfare, 
including but not
limited to police, fire, EMS, code enforcement, and trash collection;

26.        Businesses and organizations providing for the construction and 
maintenance of essential
infrastructure, including utilities such as electricity, water, wastewater, and
telecommunications;

27.        Industrial manufacturing facilities;

28.        Construction businesses; only existing or ongoing construction 
projects conducted by
these businesses may continue so as long as, to the maximum extent possible, 
all persons must
be at least six (6) feet from any other person;


29.        Insurance businesses;

30.       Security companies; and

31.        Hotels and other places of accommodation, except to the extent that 
said hotels and
places of accommodation include bars, restaurants, meeting facilities, and 
other facilities
required to be closed by City or State emergency proclamation or executive 
order.

