ORANGE COUNTY, FLORIDA
EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 2020

regarding
COVID-19

Non-Essential Travel and Safety Measures
and

Non-EssentiaI Businesses and Essential Businesses

Date: March, 2020

WHEREAS, on March 13, 2020, a State of Local Emergency was declared for
seven (7) days under the Comprehensive Emergency Management Ordinance by
Emergency Executive Order No. 2020-01 due to the serious threat posed by COVID-19;
and

WHEREAS, Emergency Executive Order No. 2020-01 was extended seven (7)
days to March 27, 2020 by Emergency Executive Order No. 2020-02, and it will be
extended for additional periods of time; and

WHEREAS, CO VID-19 is spread amongst the population by various means of
exposure, including the propensity to spread person to person and the propensity to attach
to surfaces for prolonged periods of time, thereby spreading from surface to person and
causing increased infections to persons; and

WHEREAS, public health experts have consistently recommended avoiding close
physical interaction between people in order to slow the spread of COVID-19, and the
Centers for Disease Control ("CDC") has updated and further restricted its distancing
guidelines; and

WHEREAS, despite measures previously taken, COVID-19 has rapidly spread in
the State of Florida as well as in Orange County, necessitating updated and more
stringent distancing guidelines; and

WHEREAS, while it is important to update and revise the social distancing
guidelines to protect the public, it is also important to preserve the public's access to
necessary services, such as food, prescriptions and health care, and to maintain the
operation of critical infrastructure as identified by the federal government; and



WHEREAS, the emergency powers of this Office include establishing curfews,
limiting public congregations and other powers necessary to secure the public health and
safety; and

WHEREAS, this Emergency Executive Order is issued to protect the health and
safety of the citizens, residents and visitors of Orange County, to assist the healthcare
delivery system in its ability to serve those persons infected by CO VID-19, and to
preserve the public's access to essential services and maintain the operation of critical
infrastructure.

NOW, THEREFORE,

I, Jerry L. Demings, County Mayor of Orange County, Florida, acting as the
Director of Emergency Management, promulgate the following Emergency Executive
Order:

Section 1. Non-Essential Travel and Safety Measures.

In the interest of preserving the public health and safety, individuals are ordered
not to leave the premises of their primary residence or domicile except to conduct certain
necessary activities, while practicing social distancing where practical, which include, but
are not limited to the following:

(a) Basic Needs. Visiting a health or veterinary care professional, obtaining
medical supplies or medication, obtaining financial or legal services, obtaining food,
grocery items or other household consumer products and products necessary to maintain
the safety and sanitation of residences or buildings (whether commercial, office or
industrial), for personal use or for use by others, including, without limitation, services
related to providing food, groceries, household products, health services, shelter, care or
assistance to minors, the elderly, dependents, persons with disabilities, other persons
needing assistance, friends, family members, pets or animals; attendance at public
meetings or other government purposes; and for other like or similar purposes related to
any of the foregoing.

(b) Physical Activity and Exercise. Engaging in outdoor activities and
recreation, including, without limitation, golfing, walking, hiking, running, cycling, using
scooters, roller skates, skateboards, or other personal mobility devices.

(c) Travel related to Basic Needs and Physical Activity. Travel to and from
an individual's principal residence or doniicile related to any of the basic needs described
in Section l(a) above, or physical activity and exercise described in Section l(b) above.

(d) Travel related to the Provision or Receipt of Essential Services. Travel
necessary for the provision or receipt of essential services described in Section 2,
including employees, volunteers, and service recipients of these services.



(e) Other Travel. Travel to and from transportation facilities or hubs,
airports, bus and train stations, and travel to return home from outside jurisdictions.

Section 2. Non-Essential Businesses and Essential Businesses.

(a) All non-essential retail and commercial businesses are hereby ordered
temporarily closed, including but not limited to, whether indoors or outdoors, locations
with amusement rides, carnivals, water parks, pools, zoos, museums, arcades, fairs,
children's play centers, playgrounds, theme parks, bowling alleys, pool halls, movie and
other theaters, concert and music halls, country clubs, social clubs and fraternal
organizations.

(b) The following retail and commercial businesses are deemed essential, and
may remain open:

(1) Healthcare providers, including, but not limited to, hospitals,
doctors' and dentists' offices, urgent care centers, clinics, rehabilitation facilities, physical
therapists, mental health professionals, psychiatrists, therapists, pharmacies, veterinarians
and animal care providers;

(2) Grocery stores, farmers' markets, farm and produce stands,
supennarkets, food banks, convenience stores, and other establishments engaged in the
retail sale of canned food, dry goods, fresh fmits and vegetables, fresh meats, fish, and
poultry, and any other household consumer products (such as cleaning and personal care
products). This authorization includes stores that sell groceries and other non-grocery
products, and products necessary to maintaining the safety, sanitation, and essential
operations of residences;

(3) Food cultivation, including farming, livestock, and fishing;

(4) Businesses that provide food, shelter, social services, and other
necessities of life for economically disadvantaged or otherwise needy individuals. Hotels,
motels and other housing providers;

Newspapers, television, radio, and other media services;

Gas stations;

Auto-supply, auto-repair, related facilities, and towing companies;

Banks and related financial institutions;

(5)

(6)
(7)
(8)
(9) Hardware and home improvement stores;
(10) Licensed contractors and other tradesmen, appliance repair
personnel, exterminators, and other service providers who provide services that are
necessary to maintain the safety, sanitation, and essential operation of residences and
other structures;

(11) Businesses providing mailing and shipping services, including post
office boxes;

(12) Laundromats, dry cleaners, and laundry service providers;



(13) Restaurants and other facilities that prepare and serve food, but
subject to the limitations and requirements under Federal, State or Local Emergency
Orders. Schools and other entities that typically provide free food services to students or
members of the public may continue to do so on the condition that the food is provided to
students or members of the public on a pick-up and takeaway basis only. Schools and
other entities that provide food services under this exemption shall not permit the food to
be eaten at the site where it is provided, or at any other gathering site;

(14) Businesses that supply office products needed for people to work
from home;

(15) Businesses that sell medical equipment and supply providers. Also,
businesses that supply other essential businesses with support and supplies necessary to
operate, and which do not interact with general public;

(16) Businesses that ship or deliver groceries, food, goods, or services
directly to residences;

(17) Airlines, taxis, and other private transportation providers providing
transportation services via automobile, truck, bus, or train;

(18) Home-based care for seniors, adults, or children;

(19) Assisted living facilities, nursing homes, and adult day care
centers, and senior residential facilities;

(20) Legal or accounting services and notaries public;
(21) Landscape and pool care businesses, including residential
landscape and pool care ser/ices, and maintenance of property, equipment and grounds of
businesses, whether or not currently open to the public;

(22) Childcare facilities providing services that enable employees
exempted in this Emergency Executive Order to work, as permitted. To the extent
practical, childcare facilities shall operate under the following mandatory conditions:

a. Childcare shall take place in stable groups often (10) or
fewer people (inclusive of childcare providers for the group);

b. Children and childcare providers shall not change from one
group to another; and

c. If more than one group of children is cared for at one
facility, each group shall be in a separate room, and groups shall not mix or interact with
each other;

(23) Businesses operating at an aiqiort, government facility, or
government office;

(24) Pet supply stores;

(25) Logistics providers, including warehouses, trucking, consolidators,
fumigators, and handlers;



(26) Telecommunications providers, including sales of computer or
telecommunications devices and the provision of home telecommimications, to include
private security businesses;

(27) Providers of propane or natural gas;

(28) Constmction sites, irrespective of the type of building;

(29) Architectural, engineering, and land surveying services;

(30) Factories, manufacturing facilities, bottling plants, or other
industrial uses;

(31) Waste management services, including collection and disposal of
waste; and

(32) Businesses interacting with customers solely through electronic or
telephonic means;

(33) Businesses delivering products via mailing, shipping, or delivery
services;

(34) Office space and administrative support necessary to perform any
of the above listed essential retail or commercial business activities; and

(35) In addition to essential businesses listed above, any individuals that
are employed in or working to maintain continuity of operations of the federal critical
infrastructure sectors as more particularly described at htt ://www. cisa. ov/identi in -
critical-infrastructure-durin -covid-19. This link identifies a number of critical
infrastructure sectors as vital to the United States including (1) healthcare and public
benefits, (2) transportation systems and logistics, (3) communications, (4) water and
wastewater, (5) food and agriculture, (6) nuclear reactors, hazardous materials and waste,
(7) other governmental facilities, operations and essential functions, (8) energy, (9)
financial services, (10) commercial facilities, (11) emergency services, (12) defense
industrial base, (13) critical manufacturing, (14) chemical, and (15) information
technology. This exception only applies to individuals working in one of these critical
infrastmcture sectors while or during the course of employment in and performing their
work in that sector.

(c) This Order does not affect or limit the operations of Orange County, any
municipality, the Orange County School District, any educational institution, whether
public or private, or Federal office or facility, or any public utility, except that such
entities shall endeavor to abide by the prohibitions or restrictions of any County,
municipal. State or Federal Emergency Order, as applicable.

(d) This Order does not limit the number of persons who may be physically
present performing services at any location where an essential business is being
conducted or operated, except as expressly set forth herein or otherwise governed by a
State or Federal Order or regulation. Employers and employees of such essential
businesses are urged to practice social distancing, such as keeping at least six (6) feet
apart and limiting group size to less than ten (10) people.



(e) This Order does not limit religious or funeral services at any location, but
all persons leading, performing or attending religious or funeral services are urged to
fully comply with all measures advised by the CDC, including limiting gatherings to not
more than ten (10) people and practicing social distancing of at least six (6) feet between
persons.

Sections. Minimum Standards. The provisions of this Emergency
Executive Order shall serve as minimum standards, and shall not modify any powers
possessed by municipalities to impose more stringent standards within their respective
jurisdictions.

Section 4. Variances or Exceptions. Any variance or exception to any
prohibitions set forth in Section 1 or Section 2 shall be valid only when stated in writing
signed by me or under my authority.

Section 5. Penalties. Anyone who violates this Emergency Executive Order
shall upon conviction be punished according to law and shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding the sum of Five Hundred Dollars ($500. 00), or imprisonment in the County
jail for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

Section 6. Severability. Any provision of this Emergency Executive Order
that conflicts with any Federal or State constitutional provision or law, including the
State's preemption of the regulation of fireanns and ammunition codified in Section
790. 33, Florida Statutes, or conflicts with or is superseded by an Executive Order issued
by the President of the United States or the Governor of Florida, shall be deemed
inapplicable and deemed to be severed from this Emergency Executive Order, with the
remainder of the Emergency Executive Order remaining intact and in full force and
effect. Nothing in this Emergency Executive Order shall be interpreted as prohibiting
retail or wholesale stores or vendors that currently sell sealed containers of alcoholic
beverages for off-premises consumption from continuing such sales for off premises
consumption.

Section 7. Effective Date; Expiration Date.

(a) This Emergency Executive Order shall become effective on March 26, 2020,
at 11:00 p.m.

(b) This Emergency Executive Order shall expire on April 9, 2020, at 11:00 p. m.

Jerry L. mings. Orange Coun ayor,
as Director of Emergency Management



RECEIVED AND FILED in the Office of the Orange County Comptroller, as Clerk to
the Board of County Commissions.

By
