RECOMMENDED BY: RANDALL L. WOODFIN, MAYOR
SUBMITTED BY: RANDALL L. WOODFIN, MAYOR

ORDINANCE NO.

AN ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH A “SHELTER IN PLACE ORDER” FOR THE CITY
OF BIRMINGHAM DURING THE COVID-l9 PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY

WHEREAS, the Council of the City of Birmingham recognizes the emergency declarations of the
President of the United States, the Governor of the State of Alabama, and the Mayor of the City of
Birmingham related to the spread of COVID-19 disease in our community; and,

WHEREAS, the Chief Health Ofﬁcer of Jefferson County and the State Health Ofﬁcer have
issued orders for the closing of certain businesses and the limitations on the operation of essential
businesses within their respective jurisdictions; and,

WHEREAS, the Council has authority under Ala. Code, Sec. 11-47-131, by ordinance, to prevent
the introduction of contagious, infectious, or pestilential diseases into the City and to establish and
regulate a sufﬁcient quarantine, not inconsistent with laws of the state, in the City and to punish
any breach of quarantine law; and,

WHEREAS, the Council of the City of Birmingham, has authority pursuant to the Alabama
Emergency Management Act of 1955, as amended, codiﬁed at Ala. Code, 1975, Sec. 31-9-
10(b)(5), to exercise certain powers if the Council ﬁnds that any of the conditions listed in Sec. 31-
9-2(a) have occurred or are likely to occur, speciﬁcally, the occurrence of disasters or emergencies
of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile
action, or from ﬁre, ﬂood, earthquake, or other natural causes; and,

WHEREAS, Sec. 31-9—10(b)(5)b. authorizes the Council to impose a public safety curfew for its
inhabitants, to be enforced by the Birmingham Police Department or other appropriate law
enforcement agency Within the City; and,

WHEREAS, the Council ﬁnds that an emergency of unprecedented size resulting from the natural
cause of community spread of a novel human coronavirus disease, COVID-19, has occurred in the
City of Birmingham; and,

WHEREAS, COVID-19 is a disease caused by a novel coronavirus, previously unknown in
humans, and causes upper—respiratory tract illnesses that can range from mild to severe, spread

quickly, and may cause death, particularly in older adults and persons with certain chronic medical
conditions; and,

WHEREAS, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 to be a global pandemic as of
March 15, 2020; and,

WHEREAS, the spread and effect of COVID-l9 has created a humanitarian crisis of
unanticipated proportions; and,

WHEREAS, on March 13, 2020, President Donald Trump declared a national emergency related
to the COVID—19 pandemic, restricting international travel to prevent spread of the disease; and,

WHEREAS, Governor Kay Ivey declared a state of emergency for the State ofAlabama on March
13, 2020; and,

WHEREAS, Mayor Randall L. Woodﬁn declared a state of emergency in the City of Birmingham
on March 16, 2020; and,

WHEREAS, the City of Birmingham is threatened by COVID-19 because of the extraordinary
ability of the virus to spread rapidly among humans, and COVID-19 thereby constitutes a clear and
present threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and visitors of the City; and

WHEREAS, although under investigation and development, no vaccine or drug is currently
available to cure or combat COVID-19; and

WHEREAS, as of March 23, 2020, Alabama has 196 identiﬁed cases of coronavirus, including 86
in J etferson County, where the City of Birmingham is primarily located; and,

WHEREAS, the Council ﬁnds that it is in the best interest of the public peace, health, and safety,
and to preserve the lives of citizens of the City of Birmingham, to impose a public safety curfew t0
ﬁlrther the purposes of the measures that have been ordered to date to control community spread of
COVID-19 in the City of Birmingham.

SECTION 1.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the City of Birmingham that a
“Shelter in Place Order”, which establishes a public safety curfew, is hereby imposed in the City of
Birmingham, effective 12:00 pm (noon) today, March 24, 2020. This is curfew shall be effective
until 12:00 am (midnight) April 3, 2020, unless it is determined that the emergency conditions no
longer exist prior to that date but may be extended if the duration of the emergency conditions
continue beyond that date.

(a) This curfew shall apply to all persons within the City of Birmingham. During such curfew, all
persons shall remain in their places of residence and shall not be or remain in public places, except
as further provided in this ordinance.

This curfew shall not apply to:

( 1) public safety or emergency service activities, including but not limited to law enforcement,
ﬁre and rescue services, and emergency management agencies

(2) ﬁrst responders, crisis intervention workers, public health workers, emergency management
personnel, emergency dispatchers, law enforcement personnel, and related contractors

(3) persons employed by or contracted to utilities, cable, and telecommunications companies
and engaged in activities necessary to maintain or restore utility, cable, and
telecommunications services

(4) persons providing ﬁre, police, sanitation, security, emergency and hospital services, food
delivery services and other deliveries of merchandise or mail

(5) persons seeking essential services or commodities; persons who are vulnerable to the most
serious effects of the COVID-19 disease must remain at home, unless seeking medical
treatment

(6) persons supplying or restocking businesses in order to provide essential services or
products, i.e. home improvement, groceries, fuel delivery locations, pharmacies or other
retailers offering emergency supplies, transportation of ﬁiels, movement of equipment and
personnel for the provision of humanitarian support, and movement of equipment necessary
for the protection of critical infrastructure or public safety

(7) persons employed by the federal, state, county or city government or their agencies working
within the course and scope of their public service employment. Such employees shall
follow any current or future directives regarding performance of their duties, including
working from home, issued by their respective employers.

(8) persons experiencing homeless within the City

(b) All businesses within the City of Birmingham shall comply with the Order of the Jefferson
County Chief Health Ofﬁcer, as amended March 22, 2020, or as may be amended, relating to the
closing of nonessential businesses. This shall include businesses Within the Shelby County portion
of the City.

(c) All public and private gatherings of 10 or more persons or of any size where a consistent
distance of at least six feet cannot be maintained prohibited, except as to those exempted activities
further provided in this ordinance. This provision does not apply to gatherings within a single
household or living unit.

((1) All travel, including, Without limitation, travel on foot, bicycle, scooter, motorcycle,
automobile, or public transit is prohibited, subj ect t0 the exceptions further provided in this
ordinance.

(e) Exceptions. People may lawfully leave their residence while this ordinance is in effect only to
engage in the following activities:

(i) First 24 hour allowance. This ordinance shall not apply, for a 24-hour period following
the effective date above, to allow employees and business owners to access to their
workplaces to gather belongings or address other administrative needs, so long as social

distancing requirements are followed. Workplaces closed by order of the Chief Health
Ofﬁcer shall remain closed to the public.

(ii) Essential Activities. To engage in certain essential activities, including, without
limitation, visiting a health or veterinary care professional, obtaining medical supplies or
medication, obtaining grocery items (including, without limitation, canned food, dry goods,
fresh fruits and vegetables, pet supplies, fresh or ﬁozen meats, ﬁsh, and poultry, any other
household consumer products and products necessary to maintain the safety and sanitation
of residences and other buildings) for their household or to deliver to others, or for legally
mandated government purposes. Additionally, any travel related to (a) providing care for
minors, the elderly, dependents, persons with disabilities, or other vulnerable persons; (b)
returning to one’s place of residence from outside the City; (c) travelling to one’s place of
residence located outside the City; (d) travelling through the City from one location outside
the City to another location outside the City; (e) compliance with an order of law
enforcement or court shall be exempt from this ordinance; (t) travelling to or from a place
of business which provides essential services by owners and employees of such business; or
(g) legally mandated government purposes. Persons engaging in these essential activities
shall maintain reasonable social distancing practices. This includes maintaining a distance
of at least six—feet away from others, frequently washing hands with soap and water for at
least twenty seconds or using hand sanitizer, covering coughs or sneezes (into the sleeve or
elbow, not hands), regularly cleaning high-touch surfaces, and not shaking hands.

(iii) Outdoor Activities. To engage in outdoor activity and recreation, provided that the
recreational activity does not involve physical contact with other persons and individuals
comply with social distancing requirements, including, without limitation, walking, hiking,
running, cycling; use of scooters, roller skates, skateboards, or other personal mobility
devices; or travel in a vehicle with household members to a location where it is possible to
walk, hike, run or ride a bike, or operate personal mobility devices, while maintaining
social distancing practices. Indoor and outdoor playgrounds for children, except those
located within childcare centers, shall be closed for all purposes.

(iv) Work in Support of Essential Activities. To perform work providing essential products
and services or to otherwise carry out activities speciﬁcally permitted in this ordinance.

(v) To care for or support a friend, family member, or pet in another household.

(Vi) Provision of essential goods and services. This includes those businesses and activities
deemed essential by Order of the Chief Health Ofﬁcer.

(viii) Providing any services, goods, or work necessary to build, operate, maintain or
manufacture essential infrastructure, including without limitation construction of
commercial, ofﬁce and institutional buildings, residential buildings and housing; airport
operations, food supply, concessions, and construction; port operations and construction;
water, sewer, gas, electrical, oil extraction and reﬁning; roads and highways, public

transportation and rail; solid waste collection and removal; ﬂood control and watershed
protection; internet and telecommunications systems (including the provision of essential
global, national, and local infrastructure for computing services, business infrastructure,
communications, and web-based services); and manufacturing and distribution companies
deemed essential to the supply chains of the industries referenced in this Paragraph,
provided that they carry out those services and that work in compliance with social
distancingr practices as prescribed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and
the Jefferson County ChiefHealth Ofﬁcer, to the extent possible.

(i) The City shall work with governmental and nongovernmental partners to provide emergency
shelter, to the extent possible, to unhoused persons in the City. Providers shall make all efforts to
provide protection ﬁom the spread of COVID-l 9.

SECTION 2. To the extent that this ordinance is in conﬂict with other ordinances of the City, this
ordinance shall supersede the others until this ordinance is amended or repealed.

SECTION 3. Failure to comply with this ordinance is punishable by the general penalty provided
in Sec. 1-1-6 of the General Code of the City of Birmingham.

SECTION 4. If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance or any
application of it to any person, structure, or circumstance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by a decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, then such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions or applications of this ordinance.

