Office of the Mayor

MUNICIPALITY OF ANCHORAGE

Mayor Ethan A. Berkowitz

MUNICIPALITY OF ANCHORAGE
PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY

"HUNKER DOWN" ORDER
E0-03

Phone: (907) 343-7100

ISSUED BY THE MAYOR OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF ANCHORAGE PURSUANT TO
ANCHORAGE MUNICIPAL CODE SECTION 3.80.060H.

The COVID-l 9 pandemic has generated a public health emergency that threatens to overwhelm our health system,
endangering the lives and wellbeing of the people of Anchorage. We can take steps to slow and hopefully contain
the threat, but those steps require coordinated community action. This order is put forward to preserve the health
and safety of our community while ensuring that vital goods and services continue to be available.

I HEREBY ORDER THE FOLLOWING EMERGENCY RESPONSE TO PRESERVE LIFE IN AND
ADJACENT TO THE MUNICIPALITY. THE FOLLOWING EMERGENCY REGULATIONS BEGIN AT
10:00 P.M. ON SUNDAY, MARCH 22, 2020 AND REMAIN IN EFFECT UNTIL 11 :59 P.M. ON TUESDAY,
MARCH 31, 2020.

1. Everyone currently in the Municipality of Anchorage (the "Municipality") shall stay at home as much as
possible, except to work in certain critical jobs, listed below; to buy, sell, or deliver groceries or other
important goods; to receive or provide health care; and to get fresh air without contacting others. On the
limited occasions when individuals leave home, they should maintain social distancing of at least six feet
from any person outside their household whenever possible. Individuals are also encouraged to practice
recommended hygiene, including regular hand washing.

ò Individuals experiencing homelessness are exempt from this Section, but are strongly urged to
obtain shelter, and entities are strongly urged to make such shelter available as soon as possible and
to the maximum extent practicable (and to use COVID-19 risk mitigation practices in their
operation).

2. It is strongly recommended, in accordance with Center for Disease Control (CDC) guidance, that certain
individuals within the Municipality should talce even greater precaution.

a. Anyone particularly at-risk from COVID-19 should reduce exposure by staying at home, not
physically going to work, and not doing their own shopping if possible. People particularly at risk
of complications from COVID-19 include those 60 years and older and individuals of any age with
a serious underlying medical condition. Household members of those who are at elevated risk
should implement these more stringent guidelines as well, to the extent possible.

P.O. Box 196650 ò Anchorage, Alaska 99519-6650 ò http:/lwww.muni.org



a. Anyone more likely to be contagious with COVID-19 should reduce contact with others even further
by not leaving home except to obtain medical care or to get fresh air. People who are more likely to
be contagious include individuals exhibiting symptoms of COVID-19 (including coughing,
shortness of breath, and fever) and individuals who have recently traveled. Individuals who have
recently travelled outside the Municipality are advised, in accordance with CDC guidelines, to stay
at home as much as possible for fourteen days. Household members of those who are possibly
contagious should implement these more stringent guidelines as well, to the extent possible.

3. Some businesses and entities serve critical roles that are necessary to combat this public health
emergency or provide critical community functions and cannot be put on hold while we address the
emergency. These businesses and entities are encouraged to remain open. While open, those businesses
and entities should comply with social distancing guidelines as much as possible, including by
maintaining six-foot social distancing for employees and for members of the public, including when any
customers are standing in line. A list of businesses defined as critical is listed below at paragraph
number five.

4. All other businesses and entities in the Municipality must close their premises; however, businesses and
entitles may continue to utilize telecommuting or work from home procedures.

5. Critical businesses (to include non-profit and other entities) include:

a. "Healthcare Operations" including hospitals, clinics, dentists, pharmacies, other healthcare
facilities, home healthcare services providers, mental health providers, companies and
institutions involved in the research and development, manufacture, distribution, warehousing,
and supplying of pharmaceuticals, biotechnology therapies, consumer health products, medical
devices, diagnostics, equipment, services, or any related and/or ancillary healthcare services.
"Healthcare Operations" also includes veterinary care and healthcare services provided to
animals. "Healthcare Operations" does not include fitness and exercise gyms and similar
facilities. Healthcare operations remain subject to the restrictions in the Mayor's Emergency
Order EO-02. To expand the capacity and supply of Healthcare Operations necessary for th~
response to the COVID-19 pandemic, all Healthcare Operators shall postpone appointments that
are non-urgent or non-emergency whenever possible, and consider alternatives to face-to-face
visits, in accordance with CDC guidance for Healthcare Facilities.

b. Businesses providing any services or performing any work necessary to the operations and
maintenance of "Critical Infrastructure," including, but not limited to, the Port of Alaska, public
works construction, construction of housing, airport operations, water, sewer, gas, electrical, oil
production, roads and highways, trucking and shipping companies, public transportation, solid
waste collection and removal, internet, and telecommunications systems;

b. First responders, emergency management personnel, emergency dispatchers, court personnel,
and law enforcement personnel;

c. Critical Government Functions, meaning all services needed to ensure the continuing operation
of the government agencies and provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Federal
and State of Alaska employees should follow direction of their employer regarding whether and
where to report to work;

d. Defense and national security-related operations supporting the U.S. Government or a contractor
to the U.S. government;



e. Grocery stores, supermarkets, food banks, marijuana dispensaries, convenience stores, and other
establishments engaged in the retail sale of food, beverages, or other household consumer
products (such as cleaning and personal care products, pet food and pet supplies). This includes
stores that sell groceries and also sell other non-grocery products, as well as stores that sell
products necessary to maintaining the safety, sanitation, and operation of residences;

f. Food cultivation, including fishing, hunting, farming, and livestock;

g. Businesses that provide food, shelter, and social services, and other necessities of life for
economically disadvantaged, unsheltered, or otherwise vulnerable individuals;

h. Newspapers, television, radio, and other media services;

i. Gas stations and auto-supply, auto-repair, towing companies, and related facilities;

j. Banks, mortgage companies, insurance companies, and related financial institutions;

k. Hardware stores;

1. Plumbers, electricians, exterminators, and other service providers who provide services that are
necessary to maintaining the safety, sanitation, and operation of residences and critical
businesses;

m. Businesses providing mailing and shipping services;

n. Educational institutions for purposes of facilitating distance learning;

o. Laundromats, dry cleaners, and laundry service providers;

p. Restaurants, bars, and breweries and other facilities that prepare and serve food and beverages,
but only for delivery or carry out under the restrictions laid out in the Mayor's Emergency Order
E0-01;

q. Businesses that supply products needed for people to work from home;

r. Businesses that supply other critical businesses with the support or supplies necessary to operate; l

s. Businesses that ship or deliver groceries, food, goods or services directly to residences;

u. Businesses that provide transportation services of passengers or goods, including the Alaska
Railroad;

v. Home-based care for seniors, adults, or children;

w. Hotels, residential facilities and shelters for seniors, adults, and children;

x. Professional services, such as legal or accounting services, when necessary to assist in
compliance with legally mandated activities;

y. Childcare facilities, subject to new recommendations for increased hygiene and social distancing.
Childcare facilities should be used only by those who need childcare to work at a critical job.



If your business is not listed above, but you believe that it is critical or it is an entity providing critical
services or functions, you may request an opinion from the Mayor that your business should be designated
a critical business.

DATED this 20th day of March, 2020.

Ethan Berkowitz, Mayo

Municipality of Anchorage, Alaska