AN  ORDINANCE  FOR  THE  SECOND  DELARATION  OF  A  LOCAL  STATE  OF
EMERGENCY RELATED TO COVID-19; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, Athens-Clarke County, Georgia has experienced an event of critical
significance as a result of the Coronavirus (COVID-19) disease (“COVID-19”); 
and

WHEREAS, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, (the “CDC”) indicates 
that
COVID-19 is a new and contagious respiratory disease caused by a novel (new) 
coronavirus that
was first detected in China and which has now been detected in more than 100 
locations around
the world, including in the United States; and

WHEREAS, as reported by the World Health Organization (“WHO”), the world has
experienced a deep humanitarian crisis with more than 164,000 cases and more 
than 6,000 deaths
due to COVID-19; and

WHEREAS, COVID-19 is officially a global pandemic according to the WHO; and
WHEREAS, on March 13, 2020, President Donald Trump has declared a national

emergency for the United States of America in response to COVID-19; and
WHEREAS, on March 14, 2020, Governor Brian Kemp declared a public health

Emergency due to COVID-19; and

WHEREAS, on March 16, 2020, the Mayor and Commission of the Unified Government
of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia adopted an Ordinance for the Declaration of 
Local State of
Emergency related to COVID-19;

WHEREAS, as reported by the CDC effective as of March 17, 2020, Georgia now has
197 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and one (1) COVID-19 related death; and

WHEREAS, the CDC has issued guidance on the emerging and rapidly evolving
situation of the COVID-19 pandemic, including how to protect oneself from 
illness; and

WHEREAS, social distancing is recommended by the CDC to prevent the continued
spreading of the illness in the community; and

WHEREAS, on March 16, 2020, President Donald Trump issued his Coronavirus
Guidelines for America which instructs people to listen to their local 
authorities and to avoid
social gatherings of more than (10) people; and

WHEREAS, cities, states, and counties, including but not limited to, the Alameda
County, California, the City of Los Angeles, California, the City of Seattle, 
Washington, and the
states of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have imposed temporary 
restrictions related to


public and private gatherings to stop large numbers of people from gathering 
and staying in close
proximity during the COVID-19 pandemic; and

WHEREAS, the CDC expects that additional cases of COVID-19 will be identified 
in the
coming days, including more cases in the United States, and that 
person-to-person spread is
likely to continue to occur; and

WHEREAS, local emergency hospital personnel have reported to the Mayor and
Commission that they are treating patients with symptoms consistent with 
COVID-19 and that
there            is shortage of personal protective equipment which places the 
health, safety, and welfare of
emergency medical personnel at risk and the general public;

WHEREAS, medical professionals have advised that if COVID-19 spreads in Athens-
Clarke County and the rest of Georgia, at a rate comparable to the rate of 
spread in other affected
areas, it may greatly strain the resources and capabilities of county and 
municipal governments,
including public health agencies, that provide essential services for 
containing and mitigating the
spread of contagious diseases, such as COVID-19, and the situation may become 
too large in
scope to be handled in its entirety by the normal county and municipal 
operating services in
some parts of this State, and this situation may spread to other parts of the 
State; and

WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Mayor and Commission of the Unified Government
of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, as of the date of this Ordinance, there exist 
emergency
circumstances as a result of COVID-19 within the geographical boundaries of the 
Unified
Government        as described in Section 1-102 of the Charter requiring 
extraordinary and immediate
corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the 
citizens of Athens-
Clarke County and the surrounding communities; and

WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people resulting from this pandemic, 
the
Mayor and Commission finds that certain actions are required, including but not 
limited to, the
social distancing measures set forth herein;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 1-104 (d) of the Charter of the Unified Government 
of
Athens-Clarke County, Georgia, the Mayor and Commission have the right, duty, 
power,
privilege and authority to exercise and enjoy all other powers, duties, 
functions, rights,
privileges, and immunities necessary and proper to promote or protect the 
safety, health, peace,
security and general welfare of said government and its inhabitants and to 
exercise all implied
powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as 
fully and
completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein and to do and perform 
all of the


acts pertaining to its property, affairs and local government which are 
necessary or proper in
the legitimate exercise of its corporate powers and governmental duties and 
functions; and

WHEREAS, pursuant to O.C.G.A. Sec. 38-3-28, the Mayor and Commission are
authorized to make, amend, and rescind orders, rules, and regulations as 
necessary for
emergency purposes and to supplement carrying out the emergency management 
laws; and

WHEREAS, pursuant to O.C.G.A. Sec. 38-3-51, the Governor’s declared public 
health
emergency authorizes the Mayor and Commission to use emergencies powers in 
O.C.G.A.
Sections 38-3-1 through 38-3-64; and

WHEREAS, pursuant to O.C.G.A. Sec. 38-3-6, during an emergency, O.C.G.A. 
Sections
38-3-1 through 38-3-64 are supposed to be liberally construed to effectuate 
their purposes;

NOW, THEREFORE, the Mayor and Commission of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia
hereby ordains that it is hereby declared that a local state of emergency 
exists within the
territorial limits of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke, County, Georgia, 
and shall
continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated.

THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED:

Article 1. That the Athens-Clarke County Office of Emergency Management 
activates
the Emergency Operations Plan;

Article 2. That the following sections of the Athens-Clarke County Code be
implemented:

a. Section 3-4-5 Additional Emergency Powers

b. Section 3-4-9. Authority to Waive Procedures and Fee Structures

c. Section 3-4-11. Social Distancing and Closed or Restricted Areas during 
Emergency as
Ordered below:

1. The intent of this Order is to ensure that the maximum number of people 
self-isolate in their
places of residence to the maximum extent feasible, while enabling essential 
services to
continue, to slow the spread of COVID-19 to the maximum extent possible. When 
people need
to leave their places of residence, whether to obtain or perform vital 
services, or to otherwise
facilitate authorized activities necessary for continuity of social and 
commercial life, they should
at all times reasonably possible comply with Social Distancing Requirements as 
defined in
Section 10 below. All provisions of this Order should be interpreted to 
effectuate this intent.
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Order constitutes an 
imminent threat to
public health.

2. All individuals currently living within the territorial limits of the 
Unified Government of
Athens-Clarke, County, Georgia (the “County”) shall shelter at their place of 
residence. To the
extent individuals are using shared or outdoor spaces, they must at all times 
as reasonably


possible maintain social distancing of at least six feet from any other person 
when they are
outside their residence. All persons may leave their residences only for 
Essential Activities,
Essential Governmental Functions, or to operate Essential Businesses, all as 
defined in Section

10. Individuals experiencing homelessness are exempt from this Section, but are 
strongly urged
to obtain shelter, and governmental and other entities are strongly urged to 
make such shelter
available as soon as possible and to the maximum extent practicable (and to 
utilize Social
Distancing Requirements in their operation).

3. All businesses with a facility in the County, except Essential Businesses as 
defined below in
Section 10, are required to cease all activities at facilities located within 
the County except
Minimum Basic Operations, as defined in Section 10. For clarity, businesses may 
also continue
operations consisting exclusively of employees or contractors performing 
activities at their own
residences (i.e., working from home). All Essential Businesses are strongly 
encouraged to remain
open. To the greatest extent feasible, Essential Businesses shall comply with 
Social Distancing
Requirements as defined in Section 10 below, including, but not limited to, 
when any customers
are standing in line.

4. All public and private gatherings of any number of people occurring outside 
a household or
living unit are prohibited, except for the limited purposes as expressly 
permitted in Section 10.
Nothing in this Order prohibits the gathering of members of a household or 
living unit.

5. All travel, including, but not limited to, travel on foot, bicycle, scooter, 
motorcycle,
automobile, or public transit, except Essential Travel and Essential Activities 
as defined below in
Section 10, is prohibited. People must use public transit only for purposes of 
performing
Essential Activities or to travel to and from work to operate Essential 
Businesses or maintain
Essential Governmental Functions. People riding on public transit must comply 
with Social
Distancing Requirements as defined in Section 10 below, to the greatest extent 
feasible. This
Order allows travel into or out of the County to perform Essential Activities, 
operate Essential
Businesses, or maintain Essential Governmental Functions.

6. This Order is issued based on evidence of increasing occurrence of COVID-19 
within the
County and throughout the State of Georgia, scientific evidence and best 
practices regarding the
most effective approaches to slow the transmission of communicable diseases 
generally and
COVID-19 specifically, and evidence that the age, condition, and health of a 
significant portion
of the population of the County places it at risk for serious health 
complications, including death,
from COVID-19. Due to the outbreak of the COVID-19 virus in the general public, 
which is now
a pandemic according to the World Health Organization, there is a public health 
emergency
throughout the County. Making the problem worse, some individuals who contract 
the COVID-
19 virus have no symptoms or have mild symptoms, which means they may not be 
aware they
carry the virus. Because even people without symptoms can transmit the disease, 
and because
evidence shows the disease is easily spread, gatherings can result in 
preventable transmission of
the virus. The scientific evidence shows that at this stage of the emergency, 
it is essential to slow
virus transmission as much as possible to protect the most vulnerable and to 
prevent the health
care system from being overwhelmed. One proven way to slow the transmission is 
to limit
interactions among people to the greatest extent practicable. By reducing the 
spread of the
COVID-19 virus, this Order helps preserve critical and limited healthcare 
capacity in the
County.


7. This Order also is issued in light of the existence of 5 confirmed cases of 
COVID-19 in the
County, as of 12:00 noon on Wednesday, March 18, 2020, including a significant 
and increasing
number of suspected cases of community transmission and likely further 
significant increases in
transmission. Widespread testing for COVID-19 is not yet available but is 
expected to increase
in              the coming days. This Order is necessary to slow the rate of 
spread and the Mayor and
Commission will re-evaluate it as further data becomes available.   The Mayor 
and Commission
also make the findings discussed in the “Whereas” paragraphs part of the 
factual findings of the
Mayor and Commission.

8. This Order is issued in accordance with, and incorporates by reference, the 
March 16, 2020,
Proclamation of a State of Emergency issued by Governor Brian Kemp.

9. This Order comes after the release of substantial guidance from the Centers 
for Disease
Control and Prevention, the Georgia Department of Public Health, and other 
public health
officials throughout the United States and around the world, including a 
variety of prior orders to
combat the spread and harms of COVID19. The Mayor and Commission will continue 
to assess
the quickly evolving situation and may modify or extend this Order, or issue 
additional Orders,
related to COVID-19.

10. Definitions and Exemptions.

a. For purposes of this Order, individuals may leave their residence only to 
perform any
of the following “Essential Activities.” But people at high risk of severe 
illness from
COVID-19 and people who are sick are urged to stay in their residence to the 
extent
possible except as necessary to seek medical care.

i. To engage in activities or perform tasks essential to their health and 
safety, or to
the health and safety of their family or household members or partners or
significant others (including, but not limited to, pets), such as, by way of 
example
only and without limitation, obtaining medical supplies or medication, visiting 
a
health care professional, or obtaining supplies they need to work from home.

ii. To obtain necessary services or supplies for themselves and their family or
household members, or to deliver those services or supplies to others, such as, 
by
way of example only and without limitation, canned food, dry goods, fresh fruits
and vegetables, pet supplies, fresh meats, fish, and poultry, and any other
household consumer products, and products necessary to maintain the safety,
sanitation, and essential operation of residences.

iii. To engage in outdoor activity, provided the individuals comply with Social
Distancing Requirements as defined in this Section, such as, by way of example
and without limitation, walking, hiking, running, or bicycling.

iv. To perform work providing essential products and services at an Essential
Business or to otherwise carry out activities specifically permitted in this 
Order,
including Minimum Basic Operations.


v. To care for a family member or pet in another household.

b. For purposes of this Order, individuals may leave their residence to work 
for or obtain
services at any “Healthcare Operations” including hospitals, clinics, dentists, 
pharmacies,
pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, other healthcare facilities, 
healthcare
suppliers,       home healthcare services providers, mental health providers, 
or any related
and/or ancillary healthcare services. “Healthcare Operations” also includes 
veterinary
care and all healthcare services provided to animals. This exemption shall be 
construed
broadly to avoid any impacts to the delivery of healthcare, broadly defined. 
“Healthcare
Operations” does not include fitness and exercise gyms and similar facilities.

c. For purposes of this Order, individuals may leave their residence to provide 
any
services or perform any work necessary to the operations and maintenance of 
“Essential
Infrastructure,” including, but not limited to, public works construction, 
construction and
all related activities (in particular affordable housing or housing for 
individuals
experiencing homelessness), airport operations, water, sewer, gas, electrical, 
oil refining,
roads and highways, public transportation, solid waste collection and removal, 
internet,
and telecommunications systems (including the provision of essential global, 
national,
and local infrastructure for computing services, business infrastructure, 
communications,
and web-based services), provided that they carry out those services or that 
work in
compliance with Social Distancing Requirements as defined this Section, to the 
extent
possible.

d. For purposes of this Order, all first responders, emergency management 
personnel,
emergency dispatchers, court personnel, and law enforcement personnel, and 
others who
need      to perform essential services are categorically exempt from this 
Order. Further,
nothing in this Order shall prohibit any individual from performing or accessing
“Essential Governmental Functions,” as determined by the governmental entity
performing those functions. Each governmental entity shall identify and 
designate
appropriate employees or contractors to continue providing and carrying out any
Essential Governmental Functions. All Essential Governmental Functions shall be
performed in compliance with Social Distancing Requirements as defined in this 
Section,
to the extent possible.

e. For the purposes of this Order, covered businesses include any for-profit, 
nonprofit, or
private educational entities, regardless of the nature of the service, the 
function they
perform, or its corporate or entity structure.

f. For the purposes of this Order, “Essential Businesses” means:

i. Healthcare Operations and Essential Infrastructure;

ii. Grocery stores, certified farmers’ markets, farm and produce stands,
supermarkets, food banks, convenience stores, and other establishments engaged
in               the retail sale of canned food, dry goods, fresh fruits and 
vegetables, pet supply,
fresh meats, fish, and poultry, and any other household consumer products (such


as cleaning and personal care products). This includes stores that sell 
groceries
and also sell other nongrocery products, and products necessary to maintaining
the safety, sanitation, and essential operation of residences;

iii. Food cultivation, including farming, livestock, and fishing;

iv. Businesses that provide food, shelter, and social services, and other 
necessities
of life for economically disadvantaged or otherwise needy individuals;

v. Newspapers, television, radio, and other media services;

vi. Gas stations and auto-supply, auto-repair, and related facilities;

vii. Banks and related financial institutions;

viii. Hardware stores;

ix. Plumbers, electricians, exterminators, and other service providers who 
provide
services that are necessary to maintaining the safety, sanitation, and essential
operation of residences, Essential Activities, and Essential Businesses;

x. Businesses providing mailing and shipping services, including post office
boxes;

xi. Educational institutions—including private K-12 schools, colleges, and
universities—for purposes of facilitating distance learning or performing 
essential
functions, provided that social distancing of six-feet per person is maintained 
to
the greatest extent possible ;

xii. Laundromats, drycleaners, and laundry service providers;

xiii. Restaurants and other facilities that prepare and serve food, but only for
delivery or carry out. Schools and other entities that typically provide free 
food
services to students or members of the public may continue to do so under this
Order    on the condition that the food is provided to students or members of 
the
public on a pick-up and take-away basis only. Schools and other entities that
provide food services under this exemption shall not permit the food to be 
eaten at
the site where it is provided, or at any other gathering site;

xiv. Businesses that supply products needed for people to work from home;

xv. Businesses or manufacturers that supply other essential businesses with the
support or supplies necessary to operate;

xvi. Businesses that ship or deliver groceries, food, goods, or services 
directly to
residences;


xvii. Airlines, taxis, and other private transportation providers providing
transportation services necessary for Essential Activities and other purposes
expressly authorized in this Order;

xviii. Home-based care for seniors, adults, or children;

xix. Residential facilities including hotels, motels, shared rental units and 
similar
facilities and shelters for seniors, adults, and children;

xx. Professional services, such as legal, accounting services, real estate 
services,
when necessary to assist in compliance with legally mandated activities;

xxi. Unless otherwise preempted by state law, childcare facilities providing
services that enable employees exempted in this Order to work as permitted. To
the extent possible, childcare facilities must operate under the following
mandatory conditions:

1. Childcare must be carried out in stable groups of 12 or fewer (“stable”
means that the same 12 or fewer children are in the same group each day).

2. Children shall not change from one group to another.

3. If more than one group of children is cared for at one facility, each
group shall be in a separate room. Groups shall not mix with each other.

4. Childcare providers shall remain solely with one group of children. g.
For the purposes of this Order, “Minimum Basic Operations” include the
following, provided that employees comply with Social Distancing
Requirements as defined this Section, to the extent possible, while
carrying out such operations:

xxii. All businesses which possesses a Class A, retail liquor package license;
Class B, retail beer package license; or a Class C, retail wine package license
shall be authorized, but only via drive-thru or in parking lots or at curb.

g. For the purposes of this Order, “Minimum Basic Operations” include the 
following,
provided that employees comply with Social Distancing Requirements as defined 
in this
Section to the extent possible, while carrying out such operations.

i. The minimum necessary activities to maintain the value of the business’s
inventory, ensure security, process payroll and employee benefits, or for 
related
functions.

ii. The minimum necessary activities to facilitate employees of the business 
being
able to continue to work remotely from their residences.


h. For the purposes of this Order, “Essential Travel” includes travel for any 
of the
following purposes. Individuals engaged in any Essential Travel must comply 
with all
Social Distancing Requirements as defined in this Section below.

i. Any travel related to the provision of or access to Essential Activities, 
Essential
Governmental Functions, Essential Businesses, or Minimum Basic Operations.

ii. Travel to care for elderly, minors, dependents, persons with disabilities, 
or
other vulnerable persons.

iii. Travel to or from educational institutions for purposes of receiving 
materials
for distance learning, for receiving meals, and any other related services.

iv. Travel to return to a place of residence from outside the jurisdiction.

v. Travel required by law enforcement or court order.

vi. Travel required for non-residents to return to their place of residence 
outside
the County. Individuals are strongly encouraged to verify that their 
transportation
out of the County remains available and functional prior to commencing such
travel.

i. For purposes of this Order, residences include hotels, motels, shared rental 
units
and similar facilities.

j. For purposes of this Order, “Social Distancing Requirements” includes
maintaining at least six-foot social distancing from other individuals, washing
hands      with soap and water for at least twenty seconds as frequently as 
possible or
using hand sanitizer, covering coughs or sneezes (into the sleeve or elbow, not
hands), regularly cleaning high-touch surfaces, and not shaking hands.

11. Enforcement and Remedies.

a. Individuals: In recognition that the Unified Government does not have the 
personnel
or resources to monitor and police distancing or gathering limitations or 
shelter in place
requirements for all individuals currently living within the territorial limits 
of the Unified
Government of Athens-Clarke, County, Georgia, the Athens-Clarke County Police
Department and other departments of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke 
County,
Georgia as deemed necessary by the manager under this Declaration are 
authorized to
support compliance with this Order through information delivery and education of
individuals regarding the imminent threat to public health posed by COVID-19.

b. Covered Businesses: Any violations of this Order by covered businesses shall 
be
considered ordinance violations subject to the general penalty provisions 
outlined in
Section 1-1-5 of the Official Code of Athens-Clarke County.


c. Individuals Experiencing Homelessness:  The Mayor and Commission direct the
manager to engage with service providers to ensure that there is ample capacity 
to
provide shelter to all homeless individuals in the territorial limits of the 
Unified
Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia while utilizing Social Distancing
Requirements, and empower the manager to utilize the facilities and resources 
of the
Unified Government to accomplish this directive.

12. The Mayor and Commission hereby direct the manager of the Unified 
Government of
Athens-Clarke County, Georgia to return to the Mayor and Commission by no later 
than Friday,
March      27, 2020, a report setting forth fiscal support recommendations for 
residents, including
modifications to the Unified Government’s fines, fees, and charges.

13. Prosperity Package Funding:

a. The Mayor and Commission of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County
orders the Manager of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County to 
allocate up to
three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) in funds by transferring funds reserved 
for the
“Prosperity Package” and any resources that may be necessary for the purpose of
providing emergency assistance to those affected by the COVID-19 Pandemic; the 
total
funds may be utilized as follows: to assist county partners with providing 
emergency
assistance to residents of Athens-Clarke County who are employees and hourly 
wage
earners of businesses operating within the boundaries of Athens-Clarke County 
whose
incomes are adversely impacted, to support small business continuity, and to 
provide
assistance to non-profit community partners who are providing essential 
services with the
response to the COVID-19 pandemic, though the total funds may be transferred to 
assist
with any of these efforts without specific limitations;

b. The Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia shall seek 
reimbursement
from the State of Georgia and from Federal Emergency funds for all eligible
expenditures.

c. The Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia shall pursue further 
ways
within the FY2021 Budget to give relief to Athens residents during the COVIN-19
pandemic.

14. To the extent reasonably possible, the Athens-Clarke County Unified 
Government hereby
directs the Manager to immediately deploy temporary hand-washing stations 
county-wide to
arrest the spread of the Coronavirus.

15. This Order shall become effective at 12:01 a.m. on March 20, 2020 and will 
continue to be in
effect until 11:59 p.m. on April 7, 2020, or until it is extended, rescinded, 
superseded, or
amended in writing by the Mayor and Commission.

16. Copies of this Order shall promptly be: (1) made available at City Hall for 
the Unified
Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; (2) posted on the Unified 
Government’s
website; and (3) provided to any member of the public requesting a copy of this 
Order.


17. If any provision of this Order to the application thereof to any person or 
circumstance is held
to be invalid, the reminder of the Order, including the application of such 
part or provision to
other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected and shall continue in 
full force and effect.
To this end, the provisions of this Order are severable.

Article 3.  Severability

1. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Commission that 
all sections,

paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are and were, 
upon their
enactment, believed by the Mayor and Commission to be fully valid, enforceable, 
and constitutional.

2. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Commission that, 
to the greatest
extent allowed by law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or 
phrase of this
Ordinance   is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause 
or phrase of this
Ordinance.       It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the Mayor 
and Commission that, to the
greatest extent allowed by law, no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or 
phrase of this
Ordinance is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, 
clause or phrase of
this Ordinance.

3. In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this 
Ordinance
shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or 
otherwise unenforceable
by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is 
the express intent of
the Mayor and Commission that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or 
unenforceability shall, to
the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or 
otherwise unenforceable
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of the 
Ordinance and that,
to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, 
sentences, paragraphs, and
sections of the Ordinance shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and 
of full force and effect.

Article 4. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with this 
Ordinance are, to the extent of
such conflict, hereby repealed or set aside.  The Ordinance adopted on March 
16, 2020, by the
Mayor and Commission of the Unified Government of Athens-Clarke County, Georgia 
for the
Declaration of Local State of Emergency related to COVID-19 is hereby repealed.

Article 5. This Ordinance shall become effective following approval by the 
Mayor and
Commission at 12:01 a.m. on March 20, 2020 and will continue to be in effect 
until 11:59 p.m.
on      April 7, 2020, or until it is extended, rescinded, superseded, or 
amended in writing by the
Mayor and Commission.

SO ORDERED AND ORDAINED this        day of March, 2020.

THE UNIFIED GOVERNMENT OF ATHENS-
CLARKE COUNTY, GEORGIA

Kelly Girtz, Mayor

Attest:                                                                         
            
Gloria J. Spratlin, Clerk of Commission
