OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR
STATE OF HAWAI‘I

THIRD SUPPLEMENTARY PROCLAMATION

By the authority vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the State of 
Hawai‘i,
in order to provide relief for disaster damages, losses, and suffering, and to 
protect the
health,  safety,  and  welfare  of  the  people,  I,  DAVID  Y.  IGE,  Governor 
 of  the  State  of
Hawai‘i, hereby determine, designate and proclaim as follows:

WHEREAS,  on  March  4,  2020,  I  issued  a  Proclamation  declaring  a  state 
 of
emergency to support ongoing State and county responses to COVID-19;

WHEREAS,   on   March   16,   2020,   I   issued   a   Supplementary   
Proclamation
suspending certain laws hindering State and county responses to COVID-19;

WHEREAS, on March 21, 2020, I issued a Second Supplementary Proclamation
and Emergency Rules Relating to COVID-19 implementing a mandatory 
self-quarantine
for all persons entering the State, effective at 12:01 a.m. on Thursday, March 
26, 2020;

WHEREAS, COVID-19 continues to spread throughout the nation and world at
an unprecedented rate;

WHEREAS, as  of  March  23,  2020,  there  have  been  at  least  77  documented
cases of COVID-19 in the State;

WHEREAS,  the  United  States  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention
(CDC)   and   the   Hawai‘i   Department   of   Health   recommend   
implementing   social
distancing strategies to reduce the spread of COVID-19;

WHEREAS, the dangers of COVID-19 require the serious attention, effort, and
sacrifice  of  all  people  in  the  State  to  avert  unmanageable  strains  
on  our  healthcare
system and other catastrophic impacts to the State;

WHEREAS, it has become necessary to supplement the Proclamation of March
4,   2020,   the   Supplementary   Proclamation   of   March   16,   2020,   
and   the   Second
Supplementary  Proclamation  of  March  21,  2020,  to  mandate  and  
effectuate  social
distancing measures throughout the State in order to reduce the spread of 
COVID-19;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DAVID Y. IGE, Governor of the State of Hawaiʻi, hereby
further   supplement   the   Proclamation   of   March   4,   2020   and   the  
 Supplementary
Proclamations  set  forth  above,  all  of  which  shall  remain  in  full  
force  and  effect,  and


order the following:

I.   All Persons in the State Must Stay at Home or in Their Place of Residence

Pursuant  to  sections  127A-12(a)(5),  127A-12(a)(14),  127A-13(a)(1),  and  
127A-
13(a)(7), HRS, all persons within the State of Hawaiʻi are ordered to stay at 
home or in
their place of residence except as necessary to maintain continuity of 
operations of the
federal  critical  infrastructure  sectors,  as  identified  at  
https://www.cisa.gov/identifying-
critical-infrastructure-during-covid-19 and as further designated below or by 
the Director
of                                                             the  Hawaiʻi  
Emergency  Management  Agency  (HIEMA).    With  respect  to  persons
residing in hotels, condominiums, townhomes, apartments, or other multi-unit 
dwellings,
“place  of  residence”  means  the  person’s  individual  hotel  room  or  
unit.   To  the  extent
persons use shared or outdoor spaces when outside their residence, they must 
comply
with the social distancing requirements set forth herein to the fullest extent 
possible.  All
persons may leave their home or place of residence only for essential 
activities or to
engage in the essential businesses and operations identified herein.  This 
order shall
take effect on March 25, 2020 at 12:01 am and remain in place until 11:59 pm on
April 30, 2020.

A.       Work in essential businesses or operations

Persons   may   travel   to   and   from   the   following   essential   
businesses   and
operations  to  the  extent  that  such  businesses  or  operations  cannot  be 
 conducted
through remote technology from homes or places of residence.  Businesses 
include for-
profit,  non-profit,  or  educational  entities,  regardless  of  the  nature  
of  the  service,  the
function they perform, or their corporate or entity structure.  All businesses 
or operations
not identified as federal critical infrastructure sectors at 
https://www.cisa.gov/identifying-
critical-infrastructure-during-covid-19  or  designated  by  the  Director  of  
HIEMA  or  listed
below, must cease:

1.        Healthcare services and facilities.  Hospitals, clinics, physician
offices, assisted living facilities, and other healthcare facilities and 
services;

2.        Stores   that   sell   groceries   and   medicine.       Grocery   
stores,
pharmacies,  licensed  medical  cannabis  dispensaries,  certified  farmers’  
markets,  farm
and  produce  stands,  supermarkets,  convenience  stores,  and  other  
establishments
engaged in the sale of groceries, canned food, dry goods, frozen foods, fresh 
fruits and
vegetables,  pet  supplies,  fresh  meats,  fish,  and  poultry,  alcoholic  
and  non-alcoholic


beverages,  and  any  other  household  consumer  products  (such  as  cleaning 
 and
personal  care  products).  This  includes  establishments  that  sell  
groceries,  medicine,
including medication not requiring a medical prescription, supplies for 
children under the
age  of  five  and  also  that  sell  other  non-grocery  products,  and  
products  necessary  to
maintain  the  safety,  sanitation,  health  and  essential  operation  of  
residences  and
essential businesses and operations;

3.        Food,  beverage,  cannabis  production  and  agriculture.  Food  and
beverage  manufacturing,  production,  processing,  and  cultivation,  
including  farming,
livestock, hunting, gathering, fishing, baking, and other agriculture, 
including marketing,
production, cultivation and distribution of animals and goods for consumption; 
licensed
cannabis  cultivation  centers;  and  businesses  that  provide  food,  
shelter,  and  other
necessities of life for animals, including animal shelters, rescues, shelters, 
kennels, and
adoption facilities;

4.        Educational institutions.   Educational institutions – including 
public
and private pre-K-12 schools, colleges, and universities – for purposes of 
implementing
appropriate  learning  measures,  performing  critical  research,  or  
performing  essential
functions,   provided   that   the   social   distancing   requirements   
identified   herein   are
maintained to the greatest extent possible;

5.        Organizations    that    provide    charitable    and    social    
services.
Businesses  and  religious  and  secular  nonprofit  organizations,  including  
food  banks,
when  providing  food,  shelter,  and  social  services,  and  other  
necessities  of  life  for
economically  disadvantaged  or  otherwise  needy  individuals,  individuals  
who  need
assistance as a result of this emergency, and people with disabilities;

6.        Media.  Newspapers, television, radio, and other media services;

7.        Gas   stations   and   businesses   needed   for   transportation.   
Gas
stations  and  auto-supply,  auto-repair,  and  related  facilities  and  
bicycle  shops  and
related facilities;

8.        Financial  institutions.    Financial  institutions,  currency  
exchanges,
consumer lenders, including but not limited to payday lenders, pawnbrokers, 
consumer
installment lenders and sales finance lenders, credit unions, appraisers, title 
companies,
financial  markets,  trading  and  futures  exchanges,  affiliates  of  
financial  institutions,
entities  that  issue bonds,  related  financial  institutions,  and  
institutions  selling  financial


products;

9.        Hardware and supply stores.  Hardware stores and businesses that

sell electrical, plumbing, and heating material;

10.      Critical   trades.       Building   and   Construction   Tradesmen   
and
Tradeswomen,  and  other  trades  including  but  not  limited  to  plumbers,  
electricians,
exterminators, cleaning and janitorial staff for commercial and governmental 
properties,
security staff, operating engineers, HVAC, painting, moving and relocation 
services, and
other  service  providers  who  provide  services  that  are  necessary  to  
maintaining  the
safety,  sanitation,  and  essential  operation  of  residences,  essential  
activities,  and
essential businesses and operations;

11.      Mail, post, shipping, logistics, delivery, and pick-up services.   Post
offices   and   other   businesses   that   provide   shipping   and   delivery 
  services,   and
businesses that ship or deliver groceries, food, alcoholic and non-alcoholic 
beverages,
goods or services to end users or through commercial channels;

12.      Laundry  services.    Laundromats,  dry  cleaners,  industrial  laundry
services,  laundry  rooms  in  hotels,  condominiums,  townhomes,  apartments,  
and  other
multi-unit dwelling structures, and laundry service providers;

13.      Restaurants for consumption off-premises.   Restaurants and other
facilities  that  prepare  and  serve  food,  but  only  for  consumption  
off-premises,  through
such means as in-house delivery, third-party delivery, drive-through, curbside 
pick-up,
and carry-out.  Entities that typically provide food services to members of the 
public may
continue to do so under this Third Supplementary Proclamation on the condition 
that the
food  is  provided  on  a  pick-up,  delivery  or  takeaway  basis  only.   
Entities  that  provide
food  services  under  this  exemption  shall  not  permit  the  food  to  be  
eaten  at  the  site
where  it  is  provided,  or  at  any  other  gathering  site  due  to  the  
virus’s  propensity  to
physically impact surfaces and personal property;

14.      Supplies to work from home.  Businesses that sell, manufacture, or
supply products needed for people to work from home;

15.      Supplies for essential businesses and operations.  Businesses that
sell, manufacture, or supply other essential businesses and operations with the 
support
or  materials  necessary  to  operate,  including  computers,  audio  and  
video  electronics,
household appliances; IT and telecommunication equipment; hardware, paint, flat 
glass;


electrical,   plumbing   and   heating   material;   sanitary   equipment;   
personal   hygiene
products;  food,  food  additives,  ingredients  and  components;  medical  and 
 orthopedic
equipment;  optics  and  photography  equipment;  diagnostics,  food  and  
beverages,
chemicals, soaps and detergent; and firearm and ammunition suppliers and 
retailers for
purposes of safety and security;

16.      Transportation.    Airlines,  taxis,  transportation  network  
providers
(such as Uber and Lyft), vehicle rental services, paratransit, and other 
private, public,
and commercial transportation and logistics providers necessary for essential 
activities
and other purposes expressly authorized in this Third Supplementary 
Proclamation;

17.      Home-based  care  and  services.    Home-based  care  for  adults,
seniors, children, and/or people with developmental disabilities, intellectual 
disabilities,
substance  use  disorders,  and/or  mental  illness,  including  caregivers  
such  as  nannies
who  may  travel  to  the  child’s  home  to  provide  care,  and  other  
in-home  services
including meal delivery;

18.      Residential facilities and shelters.  Residential facilities and 
shelters
for  adults,  seniors,  children,  and/or  people  with  developmental  
disabilities,  intellectual
disabilities, substance use disorders, and/or mental illness;

19.      Professional   services.      Professional   services,   such   as   
legal
services,   accounting   services,   insurance   services,   real   estate   
services   (including
appraisal and title services);

20.      Child care services for employees exempted by this Order.   Child
care  services,  licensed  or  authorized  under  the  law,  for  the  children 
 of  employees
exempted by this Third Supplementary Proclamation;

21.      Manufacture, distribution, and supply chain for critical products and
industries.     Manufacturing   companies,   distributors,   and   supply   
chain   companies
producing and supplying essential products and services in and for industries 
such as
pharmaceutical,  technology,  biotechnology,  healthcare,  chemicals  and  
sanitization,
waste pickup and disposal, agriculture, food and beverage, transportation, 
energy, steel
and   steel   products,   petroleum   and   fuel,   mining,   construction,   
national   defense,
communications, as well as products used by essential businesses and 
operations;

22.      Critical  labor  union  functions.     Labor  Union  essential  
activities
including the administration of health and welfare funds and personnel checking 
on the


well-being  and  safety  of  members  providing  services  in  essential  
businesses  and
operations – provided that these checks should be done remotely where possible;

23.      Hotels  and  motels.    Hotels  and  motels,  to  the  extent  used  
for
lodging and delivery or carry-out food services;

24.      Funeral  services.   Funeral,  mortuary,  cremation,  burial,  
cemetery,
and related services;

25.      Government functions.   For purposes of this Third Supplementary
Proclamation,  all  first  responders,  emergency  management  personnel,  
emergency
dispatchers,   health   workers,   court   personnel,   law   enforcement   and 
  corrections
personnel,   hazardous   materials   responders,   child   protection   and   
child   welfare
personnel,  housing  and  shelter  personnel,  national  guard,  and  other  
governmental
employees working for or to support essential businesses and operations are 
exempt.
Nothing  in  this  Third  Supplementary  Proclamation  shall  prohibit  any  
person  from
performing  or  accessing  essential  governmental  functions.    Furthermore,  
this  Third
Supplementary Proclamation does not apply to the United States government.

B.       Permitted Activities Outside the Home or Place of Residence

This order shall not apply to the following activities outside a person’s home 
or
place of residence:

1.        Travel for health and safety;

2.        Travel to engage in, receive or obtain goods or services from the
essential businesses or operations identified herein;

3.        Travel to engage in minimum basic operations of non-essential
businesses, including the minimum necessary activities to maintain the value of 
the
business’s inventory, ensure security, process payroll and employee benefits, 
and
related functions as well as the minimum necessary activities to facilitate 
employees of
the business being able to continue to work remotely from their residences;

4.        Travel   to   care   for   elderly,   minors,   dependents,   persons 
  with
disabilities, or other high risk persons;

5.        Travel from a person’s home or place of residence to the nearest
airport or other facility for departure from the State;

6.        Travel  required  by  law  enforcement  or  court  order,  including  
to
transport children pursuant to a custody agreement;


7.        Outdoor  exercise  activities,  including  ocean  activities  such   
as
surfing and swimming, so long as social distancing requirements are maintained;

8.        Walking pets on a leash.

C.       Prohibited Activities Outside the Home or Place of Residence

Pursuant  to  current  guidance  from  the  CDC,  any  gathering  of  more  
than ten
people  is  prohibited  unless  exempted  by  this  Third  Supplementary  
Proclamation.
Nothing herein prohibits the gathering of members of a household or residence.

All other places of public  gathering, whether indoors  or outdoors, including  
but
not  limited  to  fitness  centers,  gyms,  locations  with  amusement  rides,  
carnivals,  water
parks, aquariums, zoos, museums, arcades, fairs, children’s play centers, 
playgrounds,
funplexes,  theme  parks,  bowling  alleys,  movie  and  other  theaters,  
concert  and  music
halls, and social clubs shall be closed to the public.

D.       Social Distancing Requirements

All essential businesses and operations identified herein and persons engaged in
permitted  activities  identified  herein,  shall  exercise  the  following  
social  distancing
requirements to the fullest extent possible:

1.        Six-foot distances.  All persons shall maintain a minimum of six-feet
of  physical  separation  from  all  other  persons  to  the  fullest  extent  
possible.   Essential
businesses and operations shall designate with signage, tape, or by other means 
six-
foot spacing for employees and customers in line to maintain appropriate 
distance.

2.        Hand sanitizer and sanitizing products.   Essential businesses and
operations  shall  make  hand  sanitizer  and  sanitizing  products  readily  
available  for
employees and customers.

3.        Separate  operating  hours  for  high  risk  populations.     
Essential
businesses  and  operations  shall  implement  separate  operating  hours  for  
elderly  and
high risk customers.  High risk persons, including those who are sick, are 
urged to stay
in their residence to the extent possible except as necessary to seek medical 
care.

4.        Online  and  remote  access.   Essential  businesses  and  operations
shall  post  online  whether  a  facility  is  open  and  how  best  to  reach  
the  facility  and
continue services by phone or remotely.

E.       Persons Experiencing Homelessness

Persons  experiencing  homelessness  are  exempt  from  Section  I  of  this  
Third


Supplementary Proclamation but must comply with the social distancing 
requirements to
the fullest extent possible and are strongly urged to obtain shelter.   
Governmental and
other entities are strongly urged to make such shelter available as soon as 
possible and
to  the  maximum  extent  practicable  and  to  use  in  their  operation  
COVID-19  risk
mitigation practices recommended by the CDC.

F.        Criminal Penalties

Any person who intentionally or knowingly violates any provision set forth in 
this
Section  I  shall  be  guilty  of  a  misdemeanor,  and  upon  conviction,  the 
 person  shall  be
fined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.

II.  This Order Shall Have the Force and Effect of Law

Pursuant  to  section  127A-25,  HRS,  I  hereby  adopt  all  provisions  set  
forth  in
Section I of  this Third  Supplementary Proclamation as  rules that  shall have 
 the force
and effect of law.  Any person violating these rules shall be guilty of a 
misdemeanor as
set forth in section 127A-29, HRS.

In  the  event  of  any  inconsistency,  conflict  or  ambiguity  between  this 
 Third
Supplementary  Proclamation  and  any  county  emergency  order,  rule,  
directive  or
proclamation, the relevant documents shall be read to allow for maximum 
flexibility so
that essential businesses and operations continue unimpeded.

I FURTHER DECLARE that the disaster emergency relief period shall continue
through April 30, 2020, unless terminated by a separate proclamation, whichever 
shall
occur first.

Done at the State Capitol, this
23ʳᵈ day of March, 2020.

DAVID Y. IGE,

Governor of Hawaiʻi

APPROVED:

Clare E. Connors
Attorney General
State of Hawaiʻi

