EMERGENCY ORDER OF LOCAL HEALTH OFFICER

Emergency Public Health Order issued on this 24th day of March 2020 to mitigate 
the spread of
the Coronavirus (COVID-19) epidemic in Leavenworth County, Kansas, pursuant to 
the authority
provided in K.S.A. 65-119 and K.S.A. 65-129b and other applicable laws or 
regulations.


WHEREAS, the Local Health Officer is authorized and required, pursuant to 
K.S.A. 65-119 and

K.S.A. 65-129b to immediately exercise and maintain a supervision over known or 
suspected
cases of any infectious or contagious disease during its continuance, and to 
issue orders seeing
that all such cases are properly handled and that the provisions of the Kansas 
public health laws
as to isolation, quarantine and disinfection are duly enforced; and

WHEREAS, the Local Health Officer is authorized to prohibit public gatherings 
when necessary
for the control of any and all infectious or contagious diseases, pursuant to 
K.S.A. 65-129b; and

WHEREAS on the 17th day of March 2020, the Board of County Commissioners of 
Leavenworth
County, Kansas found that a disaster had occurred, or the threat thereof was 
imminent within
Leavenworth County, Kansas as a result of the Corona Virus pandemic (COVID-19) 
and the
confirmed outbreak and person-to-person spread of COVID-19 in the United 
States, Kansas and
Leavenworth County; and

WHEREAS, COVID-19, a respiratory disease that spreads easily from person to 
person and may
result in serious illness or death, has been confirmed in Kansas, resulting in 
serious illness and
at least one death to date in Kansas; and

WHEREAS, such conditions endanger health, safety and welfare of persons and 
property within
the border of Leavenworth County, Kansas; and

WHEREAS, to reduce spread ofCOVID-19, the United States Centers for Disease 
Control and
Prevention (CDC), the Kansas Department of Health and Environment (KDHE) and the
Leavenworth County Local Health Officer, all recommend implementation of 
community
mitigation strategies to increase containment of the virus, including 
cancellation of large
gatherings and social distancing in smaller gatherings; and

WHEREAS, the worldwide outbreak of COVID-19 and the resulting epidemic in 
Kansas and
Leavenworth County continue to threaten the life and health of our citizens and 
visitors as well
as           the economy and remains a public disaster affecting life, health, 
property and the public
peace.


NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDERED by the Local Health Officer, pursuant to the above
authorities, that:

Section One: Stay at Home

Individuals may leave their residence only to perform an Essential Activity. To 
the extent
possible, caregivers should keep their children at their residence unless 
childcare is necessary
for  the caregiver to perform an Essential Activity. People at high risk of 
severe illness from
COVID-19 are urged to stay in their residence except as necessary to seek 
medical care.

Individuals who are sick may leave their residence only as necessary to seek or 
receive medical
care in accordance with guidance from public health officials. All individuals 
shall exercise Social
Distancing Requirements at all times.

Section Two: Non-essential business and operations must cease.

All businesses and operations in Leavenworth County, except Essential 
Businesses as defined
below, are required to cease all activities. For clarity, businesses may also 
continue operations
consisting exclusively of employees or contractors performing activities at 
their own residences
(i.e., working from home).

Section Three: Definitions and Exemptions.

a. For purposes of this Order, Social Distancing Requirements means maintaining 
at least six-
foot social distancing from other individuals, washing hands with soap and 
water for at least
twenty seconds as frequently as possible or using hand sanitizer, covering 
coughs or sneezes
(into the sleeve or elbow, not hands), regularly cleaning high-touch surfaces, 
and not shaking
hands.

b. For purposes of this Order individuals may leave their residence only to 
perform any of the
following “Essential Activities” as described below. People at high risk of 
severe illness from
COVID-19 and people who are sick are urged to stay in their residence except as 
necessary to
seek medical care.

i.           To engage in activities or perform tasks essential to their health 
and safety, or to
the health and safety of their family or household members (including, but not
limited to, pets), such as, by way of example only and without limitation,
obtaining medical supplies or medication, or visiting a health care 
professional;

ii.          To obtain necessary services or supplies for themselves and their 
family or
household members, to obtain supplies they need to work from home, or to
deliver those services or supplies to others, such as, by way of example only 
and
without limitation, canned food, dry goods, fresh fruits and vegetables, pet
supplies, fresh meats, fish, and poultry, and any other household consumer


products, and products necessary to maintain the safety, sanitation, and
essential operation of residences;

iii.         To engage in outdoor activity, provided the individuals comply 
with Social
Distancing Requirements as defined in this Section, such as, by way of example
and without limitation, walking, hiking, or running. Use of parks and other 
public
areas are permitted. However, use of playground equipment is prohibited;

iv.         To perform work providing essential products and services at an 
Essential
Business or to otherwise carry out activities specifically permitted in this 
Order;
and

v.          To care for a family member or pet in another household.

vi.         To work for or obtain services at any “Healthcare Operations” 
including
hospitals, clinics, dentists, pharmacies, pharmaceutical and biotechnology
companies, other healthcare facilities, healthcare suppliers, home healthcare
services providers, mental health providers, or any related and/or ancillary
healthcare services. “Healthcare Operations” also includes veterinary care and
all healthcare services provided to animals. This exemption shall be construed
broadly to avoid any impacts to the delivery of healthcare, broadly defined.
“Healthcare Operations” does not include activities at fitness and exercise gyms
and similar facilities.

vii.        To provide any services or perform any work necessary to the 
operations and
maintenance of “Essential Infrastructure,” including, but not limited to, public
works construction, construction of housing (in particular affordable housing or
housing for individuals experiencing homelessness), airport operations, water,
sewer, gas, electrical, oil refining, roads and highways, public transportation,
solid waste collection and removal, internet, and telecommunications systems
(including the provision of essential global, national, and local 
infrastructure for
computing services, business infrastructure, communications, and webpage
based services), provided that they carry out those services or that work in
compliance with Social Distancing Requirements as defined this Section, to the
extent possible.

c. For purposes of this Order, all first responders, emergency management 
personnel,
emergency dispatchers, court personnel, and law enforcement personnel, and 
others
working         for or to support Essential Businesses are categorically exempt 
from this Order.
Further, nothing in this Order shall prohibit any individual from performing or 
accessing
“Essential Governmental Functions.” Essential Government Functions means all 
services
needed    to ensure the continuing operation of the government agencies and 
provide for the
health, safety and welfare of the public. All Essential Governmental Functions 
shall be


performed in compliance with Social Distancing Requirements as defined this 
Section, to the
extent possible.

d. For the purposes of this Order, covered businesses include any for-profit, 
non-profit, or
educational entities, regardless of the nature of the service, the function 
they perform, or its
corporate or entity structure.

e. For the purposes of this Order, “Essential Businesses” means:

i.           Healthcare Operations, Essential Infrastructure and Essential 
Government Functions;

ii.          Grocery stores, certified farmers’ markets, farm and produce 
stands, supermarkets,
food banks, convenience stores, and other establishments engaged in the retail 
sale
of canned food, dry goods, fresh fruits and vegetables, pet supply, fresh 
meats, fish,
and poultry, liquor stores, and any other household consumer products (such as
cleaning and personal care products). This includes stores that sell groceries 
and also
sell other non-grocery products, and products necessary to maintaining the 
safety,
sanitation, and essential operation of residences;

iii.         Food cultivation, including farming, livestock, and fishing;

iv.         Human and animal food processing facility workers;

v.          Businesses that provide food, shelter, and social services, and 
other necessities of
life for economically disadvantaged or otherwise needy individuals;

vi.         Newspapers, television, radio, and other media services;

vii.        Gas stations and auto-supply, auto-repair, and related facilities;

viii.       Banks and related financial institutions;

ix.         Hardware stores;

x.          Plumbers, electricians, exterminators, and other service providers 
who provide
services that are necessary to maintaining the safety, sanitation, and essential
operation of residences, Essential Activities, and Essential Businesses;

xi.         Businesses providing mailing and shipping services, including post 
office boxes;

xii.        Educational institutions—including public and private K-12 schools, 
colleges, and
universities—for purposes of facilitating distance learning or performing 
essential


functions related to distance learning, provided that social distancing of 
six-feet per
person is maintained to the greatest extent possible;

xiii.       Laundromats, dry cleaners, and laundry service providers;

xiv.       Restaurants and other facilities that prepare and serve food, but 
only for drive thru,
delivery or carry out and not for consumption on the premises. Schools and other
entities that typically provide free food services to students or members of the
public may continue to do so under this Order on the condition that the food is
provided to students or members of the public on a pick-up and takeaway basis
only. Schools and other entities that provide food services under this exemption
shall not permit the food to be eaten at the site where it is provided, or at 
any other
gathering site;

xv.        Businesses that supply products needed for people to work from home;

xvi.       Businesses that supply other essential businesses with the support 
or supplies
necessary to operate;

xvii.      Businesses that ship or deliver groceries, food, goods or services 
directly to
residences;

xviii.     Taxis, and other private transportation providers providing 
transportation services
necessary for Essential Activities and other purposes expressly authorized in 
this
Order;

xix.       Home-based care for seniors, adults, or children;

xx.        Residential facilities and shelters for seniors, adults, and 
children;

xxi.       Professional services, such as legal or accounting services, when 
necessary to assist
in compliance with legally mandated activities;

xxii.      Childcare facilities providing services that enable employees 
exempted in this Order
to work as permitted. To the extent possible, childcare facilities must operate 
under
the following mandatory conditions:

1. Childcare must be carried out in stable groups of 10 or fewer (“stable” means
that the same 10 or fewer children are in the same group each day);

2. Children shall not change from one group to another;


3. If more than one group of children is cared for at one facility, each group 
shall
be in a separate room. Groups shall not mix with each other; and

4. Childcare providers shall remain solely with one group of children.

f. For the purposes of this Order, weddings, wakes, or funerals are not exempt.

g. For purposes of this Order, Social Distancing Requirements includes 
maintaining at least six-
foot social distancing from other individuals, washing hands with soap and 
water for at least
twenty seconds as frequently as possible or using hand sanitizer, covering 
coughs or sneezes
(into the sleeve or elbow, not hands), regularly cleaning high-touch surfaces, 
and not shaking
hands.

Essential Businesses must take proactive measures to ensure compliance with 
Social
Distancing Requirements, including where possible:

i.           Designate six-foot distances. Designating with signage, tape, or 
by other means six-
foot spacing for employees and customers in line to maintain appropriate 
distance;

ii.          Hand sanitizer and sanitizing products. Having hand sanitizer and 
sanitizing products
readily available for employees and customers;

iii.         Separate operating hours for vulnerable populations. Implementing 
separate
operating hours for elderly and vulnerable customers; and

iv.         Online and remote access. Posting online whether a facility is open 
and how best to
reach the facility and continue services by phone or remotely.

h. For purposes of this Order, “School Operations” means any institution of 
elementary or
secondary education, including but not limited to public, chartered, private, 
or parochial
institutions. School Operations does not include a requirement that school 
buildings be closed
if   needed to house individuals, distribute food, provide medical care, 
distance learning or any
other services deemed necessary to protect the life and property and other 
critical resources.

Section Four. That due to unique characteristics and risks associated with 
transmission
dynamics, the likely spread of the disease based on factors of social 
distancing, the clinical
severity     of COVID-19, the lack of vaccine or antivirals as treatment 
options, the crowd density,
the inability to ensure social distancing and to prevent close contact among 
groups, all groups
of more than ten (10) persons and School Operations are prohibited from taking 
place in
Leavenworth County, Kansas, during the duration of this Order, unless it can be 
demonstrated
to            the satisfaction of the Local Health Officer that sufficient 
mitigation plans for infectious
diseases are in place.


Section Five. Violation of any provision of this Order constitutes an imminent 
threat and
creates an immediate menace to public health.

Section Six. This Order will continue to be in effect until 11:59p.m. April 23, 
2020 unless
extended, rescinded, superseded, or amended in writing. This Order may be 
supplemented or
modified as required for the effective and efficient management and control of 
the Coronavirus
epidemic in the County by further order or direction of the Leavenworth County 
Board of Public
Health or by the Leavenworth County Local Health Officer.

Section Seven. Pursuant to K.S.A. 65-129b, and other legal authority, any 
Sheriff, sheriff deputy,
police officer, or other law enforcement officer of the State of any political 
subdivision within
Leavenworth County is hereby ordered to assist in the execution of this Order.

IT IS SO ORDERED THIS 21TH DAY OF MARCH, 2020.

Local Health Officer
Leavenworth County, Kansas

