 COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR
ORDER OF
WHEREAS, the World Health Organization and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) have declared a novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) a “public health emergency of international concern,” and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”) Secretary has declared that COVID-19 creates a public health emergency; and
WHEREAS, as of March 6, 2020, I proclaimed the existence of a disaster emergency throughout the Commonwealth pursuant to 35 Pa. C.S. § 7301(c); and
WHEREAS, I am charged with the responsibility to address dangers facing the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that result from disasters. 35 Pa. C.S. § 7301(a); and
WHEREAS, in addition to general powers, during a disaster emergency I am authorized specifically to control ingress and egress to and from a disaster area and the movement of persons within it and the occupancy of premises therein. 35 Pa. C.S. § 7301(f); and
WHEREAS, in executing the extraordinary powers outlined above, I am further authorized during a disaster emergency to issue, amend, and rescind executive orders, proclamations, and regulations and those directives shall have the force and effect of law. 35 Pa. C.S. § 7301(b); and
WHEREAS, in addition to my authority, my Secretary of Health has the authority to determine and employ the most efficient and practical means for the prevention and suppression of disease. 71 P.S. § 532(a), 71 P.S. 1403(a); and  
WHEREAS, these means include isolation, quarantine, and any other control measure needed. 35 P.S. § 521.5; and
WHEREAS, I previously issued an Order limited to specified counties directing “Individuals to Stay at Home” on March 23, 2020, and amended March 24, March 25, March 27, March 28, March 30, and March 31, 2020; and
WHEREAS, as of April 1, 2020, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has 5,805 positive cases of COVID-19 in sixty counties and reports 74 deaths from the virus.
NOW THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me and my Administration by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, I do hereby ORDER and PROCLAIM as follows:
All individuals residing in the Commonwealth are ordered to stay at home except as needed to access, support, or provide life-sustaining business, emergency, or government services. For employees of life-sustaining businesses that remain open, the following child care services may remain open: group and family child care providers in a residence; child care facilities operating under a waiver granted by the Department of Human Services Office of Child Development and Early Learning; and, part-day school age programs operating under an exemption from the March 19, 2020, business closure Orders.
 THE GOVERNOR OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
 FOR INDIVIDUALS TO STAY AT HOME
 Section 1: Order to Stay at Home

A list of life-sustaining businesses that remain open is attached to and incorporated into this Order. In addition, businesses that are permitted to remain open include those granted exemptions prior to or following the issuance of this Order.
Individuals leaving their home or place of residence to access, support, or provide life- sustaining services for themselves, another person, or a pet must employ social distancing practices as defined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Individuals are permitted to engage in outdoor activities; however, gatherings of individuals outside of the home are generally prohibited except as may be required to access, support, or provide life-sustaining services as outlined above.
Enforcement of this Order will commence immediately for all counties covered under my prior Order directing “Individuals to Stay at Home” first issued March 23, 2020, as amended. Enforcement of this Order will commence at 8:00 PM Wednesday, April 1, 2020, for all other counties.
  Section 2: Effective Date and Duration
This order is effective immediately and will remain in effect until April 30, 2020. This Order supersedes all previous Orders directing “Individuals to Stay at Home.”
GIVEN under my hand and the Seal of the Governor, at the city of Harrisburg, on this first day of April two thousand twenty, the year of the commonwealth the two hundred and forty-fourth.
TOM WOLF Governor
   