FIRST AMENDED DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY
"SHELTER AT HOME"

WHEREAS, on March 19, 2020, pursuant to the authority vested in me by Title 38, Chapter
3 of the Official Code of Georgia and the City's Emergency and Disaster Management Ordinance,
Code of Ordinances, Part 3, Chapter 3, I issued an Emergency Declaration, which implemented
measures intended to slow the pace of the COVID-19 outbreak; and

WHEREAS, since March 19th, the disease has continued to spread throughout Georgia,
including four confirmed positive cases in Chatham County with certainly more to come; and

WHEREAS, it appears that additional measures are required to slow the spread of COVID-
19 to the maximum extent possible, while enabling essential services to continue; and

WHEREAS, this Order is issued based upon evidence of the increasing occurrence of
COVID-19 within the City and Chatham County area, scientific evidence and best practices
regarding the most effective practices regarding the most effective approaches to slow the
transmission of communicable diseases generally and COVID-19 specifically, and evidence that
the age, condition, and health of a significant portion of the population of the City places it at risk
for serious health complications, including death; and

WHEREAS, emergency conditions persist within the City requiring extraordinary and
immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of
the City of Savannah; and

WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people, certain actions are required.

NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law;

IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency continues to exist, which will
continue until the conditions requiring this First Amended Declaration are abated.

THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED WITHIN THE TERRITORIAL JURISDICTIONAL
LIMITS OF THE CITY OF SAVANNAH:

1. All individuals currently living within the City of Savannah are ordered to shelter
at their place of residence. To the extent individuals are using shared or outdoor spaces, they must
at all times as reasonably possible maintain social distancing of at least six feet from any other
person when they are outside their residence. All persons may leave their residences only for
Essential Activities, Essential Governmental Functions, or to operate Essential Businesses as
defined herein. Individuals experiencing homelessness are exempt from this Section, but are
strongly encouraged to obtain shelter, and entities offering shelter services are urged to make it
available as soon as possible and to the maximum extent practicable (and to use COVID-19 risk
mitigation practices in their operation).



2. All businesses with a facility in the City, except Essential Businesses as defined
herein, are required to cease all activities at facilities located within the City except Minimum
Basic Operations, as defined herein. For clarity, businesses may also continue operations
consisting exclusively for employees or contractors performing activities at their own residences
(i.e., working from home). To the greatest extent feasible, Essential Businesses shall comply with
Social Distancing Requirements as defined herein, including by maintaining six-foot social
distancing for both employees and members of the public, including, but not limited to, when any
customers are standing in line.

3. All public and private gatherings of any number of people occurring outside a single
household or living unit are prohibited, except for the limited purposes as expressly permitted in
this Order. Nothing in this Order prohibits the gathering of members of a household or living unit.

4. All travel, including but not limited to, travel on foot, bicycle, scooter, motorcycle,
automobile, or public transit, except Essential Travel and Essential Activities as defined below, is
prohibited. People must use public transit only for purposes of performing Essential Activities or
to travel to and from work to operate Essential Businesses or maintain Essential Governmental
Functions. People riding on public transit must comply with Social Distancing Requirements as
defined below, to the greatest extent feasible. This Order allows travel into or out of the City to
perform Essential Activities, operate Essential Businesses, or maintain Essential Governmental
Functions.

5. For purposes of this Order, individuals may leave their residence only to perform
any of the following Essential Activities. But people at high risk of severe illness from COVID-
19 and people who are sick are urged to stay in their residence to the extent possible except as
necessary to seek medical care.

a) To engage in activities or perform tasks essential to their health and safety,
or to the health and safety of their family or household members (including,
but not limited to, pets), such as, by way of example only and without
limitation, obtaining medical supplies or medication, visiting a health care
professional, or obtaining supplies they need to work from home.

b) To obtain necessary services or supplies for themselves and their family or
household members, or to deliver those services or supplies to others, such
as, by way of example only and without limitation, canned food, dry goods,
fresh fruits and vegetables, pet supplies, fresh meats, fish, and poultry, and
any other household consumer products, and products necessary to maintain
the safety, sanitation, and essential operation ofresidences.

c) To engage in outdoor activity, provided the individuals comply with Social
Distancing Requirements as defined herein, such as, by way of example and
without limitation, walking, hiking, or running.



d) To perform work providing essential products and services at an Essential
Business or to otherwise carry out activities specifically permitted in this
Order, including Minimum Basic Operations.

e) To care for a family member or pet in another household.

6. For purposes of this Order, individuals may leave their residence to work for or
obtain services at any Healthcare Operations including hospitals, clinics, dentists, pharmacies,
pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, other healthcare facilities, healthcare suppliers,
home healthcare services providers, mental health providers, or any related and/or ancillary
healthcare services. Healthcare Operations also includes veterinary care and all healthcare services
provided to animals. This exemption shall be broadly construed to avoid any impacts to the
delivery of healthcare, broadly defined. Healthcare Operations does not include fitness and
exercise gyms and similar facilities.

7. For purposes of this Order, individuals may leave their residence to provide any
services or perform any work necessary to the operations of maintenance of "Essential
Infrastructure," including, but not limited to, public works construction, construction of housing
(in particular affordable housing or housing for individuals experiencing homelessness), airport
operations, water, sewer, gas, electrical, oil refining, roads and highways, public transportation,
solid waste collection and removal, internet and telecommunications systems (including the
provision of essential global, national, and local infrastructure for computing services, business
infrastructure, communications, and web-based services), provided that they carry out those
services or that work in compliance with Social Distancing Requirements as defined herein, to the
extent possible.

8. For purposes of this Order, all first responders, emergency management personnel,
emergency dispatchers, court personnel, and law enforcement personnel, and others working for
or to support Essential Businesses are categorically exempt from this Order. Further, nothing in
this Order shall prohibit any individual from performing or accessing Essential Governmental
Functions. Essential Governmental Functions means all services needed to ensure the continuing
operation of the government agencies and provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
All Essential Governmental Functions shall be performed in compliance with Social Distancing
Requirements as defined herein, to the extent possible.

9. For purposes of this Order, Essential Businesses means:

(a) Healthcare Operations and Essential Infrastructure;

(b) Grocery stores, liquor stores, certified farmers' markets, farm and produce
stands, supermarkets, food banks, convenience stores, and other
establishments engaged in the retail sale of canned food, dry goods, fresh
fruits and vegetables, pet supplies, fresh meats, fish, and poultry, and any
other household consumer products (such as cleaning and personal care
products). This includes stores that sell groceries and also sell other non-



grocery products, and products necessary to maintaining the safety,
sanitation, and essential operation of residences;

(c) Food cultivation, including farming, livestock, and fishing;

(d) Businesses that provide food, shelter, and social services, and other
necessities of life for economically disadvantaged or otherwise needy
individuals;

(e) Newspapers, television, radio, and other media services;

(f) Gas stations and auto-supply, auto-repair, collision centers and related
facilities;

(g) Banks and related financial institutions;

(h) Hardware and home supply stores;

(i) Plumbers, electricians, exterminators, and other service providers who
provide services that are necessary to maintaining the safety, sanitation, and
essential operation of residences, Essential Activities, and Essential
Businesses;

(k) Businesses providing mailing and shipping services, including post office
boxes;

(1) Educational institutions-including public and private K-12 schools,
colleges, and universities-for purposes of facilitating distance learning or
performing essential functions, provided that social distancing of six-feet
per person is maintained to the greatest extent possible;

(m) Laundromats, dry cleaners, and laundry service providers;

(n) Restaurants and other facilities that prepare and serve food, but only for
delivery or carry out, which may include the sale of packaged beer and wine
in their original, sealed containers for consumption beyond the licensed
seller's premises. Schools and other entities that typically provide free food
services to students or members of the public may continue to do so under
this Order on the condition that the food is provided to students or members
of the public on a pick-up and take-away basis only. Schools and other
entities that provide food services under this exemption shall not permit the
food to be eaten at the site where it is provided, or at any other gathering
site on school premises; '

( o) Businesses that supply products needed for people to work from home;



(p) Businesses that supply other essential businesses with the support or
supplies necessary to operate;

( q) Businesses that ship or deliver groceries, food, goods, or services directly
to residences;

(r) Airlines, taxis, and other private transportation providers providing
transportation services necessary for Essential Activities and other purposes
expressly authorized in this Order;

(s) Home-based care for seniors, adults, or children;

(t) Residential facilities and shelters for seniors, adults, and children;

(u) Professional services, such as legal or accounting services, when necessary
to assist in compliance with legally mandated activities;

(v) Childcare facilities providing services that enable employees exempted in
this Order to work are permitted. To the extent possible, childcare facilities
must operate under the following mandatory conditions:

(1) Childcare must be carried out in stable groups of 12 or fewer
("stable" means that the same 12 or fewer children are in the same
group each day).

(2) Children shall not change from one group to another.

(3) If more than one group of children is cared for at one facility, each
group shall be in a separate room. Groups shall not mix with each
other.

( 4) Childcare providers shall remain solely with one group of children.

(w) Critical Infrastructure Sectors, as set forth at https: //www.cisa.2:ov//critical-
infrastructure-sectors, which is hereby incorporated by reference herein.

(x) Any private construction project for which a valid permit has been issued
as of the date of signing of the 1st Amended Declaration shall be allowed to
continue.

10. For purposes of this Order, Minimum Basic Operations include the following,
provided that employees comply with Social Distancing Requirements as defined herein, to the
extent possible, while carrying out such operations:



(a) The minimum necessary to maintain the value of the business's inventory,
ensure security, process payroll and employee benefits, or for related
functions.

(b) The minimum necessary activities to facilitate employees of the business
being able to continue to work remotely from their residences.

11. For purposes ofthis Order, Essential Travel includes travel for any of the following
purposes. Individuals engaged in any Essential Travel must comply with all Social Distancing
Requirements, as defined herein.

(a) Any travel related to the provision of or access to Essential Activities,
Essential Governmental Functions, Essential Businesses, or Minimum
Basic Operations.

(b) Travel to care for elderly, minors, dependents, persons with disabilities, or
other vulnerable persons.

(c) Travel to or from educational institutions for purposes of rece1vmg
materials for distance learning, for receiving meals, and any other related
services.

( d) Travel to return to a place of residence from outside the jurisdiction.

( e) Travel required by law enforcement or court order.

(f) Travel required for non-residents to return to their places of residence
outside the City. Individuals are strongly encouraged to verify that their
transportation out of the City remains available and functional prior to
commencing such travel.

12. For purposes of this Order, residences include hotels, motels, shared rental units,
and similar facilities.

13. For purposes of this Order, Social Distancing Requirements includes maintaining
at least 6-foot social distancing from other individuals, washing hands with soap and water for at
least 20 seconds as frequently as possible or using hand sanitizer, covering coughs or sneezes (into
the sleeve or elbow, not hands), regularly cleaning high-touch surfaces, and not shaking hands.

14. Open air City parks and squares shall remain open; provided, however, Social
Distancing Requirements are followed to the greatest extent possible.

15. Public swimming pools, playgrounds, playing fields, basketball courts, and tennis
courts shall be closed.



16. Barber shops, beauty parlors, and personal care salons may remain open; provided,
however, Social Distancing Requirements shall be followed to the greatest extent possible.

17. To the extent not superseded by this First Amended Declaration, the Emergency
Declaration of March 19, 2020 remains in effect and is hereby extended until 12:00 a.m. on April
8, 2020 unless otherwise amended, extended, or cancelled by the Mayor.

18. This Declaration shall take effect at 11 :59 p.m. on Tuesday, March 24, 2020.

19. This Declaration shall expire at 12:00 a.m. on April 8, 2020 unless otherwise
amended, extended, or cancelled by the Mayor.

20. If any provision of this Order or its application to any person or circumstance is
held to be invalid, then the remainder of the Order, including the application of such part or
provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected and shall continue in full force
and effect. To this end, the provisions of this Order are severable.

21. Any person found to be in violation of this First Amended Declaration shall be
subject to citation to Recorder's Court and penalty as set forth in City Code Section 1-1013.

Attested to by:
Mark Massey, Clerk of Council
