STATE OF VERMONT EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT
ADDENDUM 6 TO EXECUTIVE ORDER 01-20 [Stay Home/Stay Safe]
WHEREAS, on Friday, March 13, 2020, the Governor issued Executive Order 01-20, Declaration of State of Emergency in Response to COVID-19 and National Guard Call-Out (“Executive Order”), declaring a state of emergency for the State of Vermont in response to COVID-19; and
WHEREAS, since that time, the number of cases of COVID-19 which have been tested as presumptively positive in the State has grown exponentially and unfortunately the State has seen its first deaths from this disease; and
WHEREAS, the Executive Order expressly recognized the critical need to take steps to control outbreaks of COVID-19, particularly among those who are elderly or already have underlying chronic health conditions, to minimize the risk to the public, maintain the health and safety of Vermonters, and limit the spread of infection in our communities and within our healthcare facilities; and
WHEREAS, VDH is urging all residents of the State to limit normal everyday activities outside of the home and to practice social distancing at all times to limit the spread of this highly contagious and potentially deadly virus; and
WHEREAS, consistent with Centers for Disease Control (CDC) guidelines regarding social distancing, and in consultation with the Commissioner of the Department of Health (VDH), the Governor has directed a number of mitigation strategies for the State in order to reduce close contact among individuals, including the closure of bars and restaurants, schools and day care centers and close contact businesses; limiting the size of mass gatherings; postponing all non- essential medical procedures; and ordering all businesses to implement telecommuting where possible; and
WHEREAS, the Governor understands most Vermonters, Vermont communities and Vermont businesses recognize the potentially disastrous effects of COVID-19 if we were to continue business as usual, and have taken responsible, common sense, and creative measures to conduct our businesses and our lives in a manner consistent with CDC and Vermont Department of Health social distancing guidelines; and
WHEREAS, nonetheless, further measures are needed to reduce the spread of COVID-19 to, avoid needless illness and deaths while ensuring the continuity of functions critical to public health and safety and our economic and national security.

NOW THEREFORE, in order to restrict and minimize all unnecessary activities outside of the home or place of residence during the state of emergency, I, Philip B. Scott, by virtue of the authority vested in me as Governor of Vermont by the Constitution of the State of Vermont, the emergency powers set forth in 20 V.S.A. §§ 8, 9 and 11 and other laws, hereby order the following:
1. To preserve the public health and safety, to ensure the healthcare delivery system is capable of serving all, and to help protect those at the highest risk and vulnerability, Vermonters are directed to stay at home or in their place of residence, leaving only for essential reasons such as: personal safety; groceries or medicine; curbside pick-up of goods, meals or beverages; medical care; exercise; care of others; and work, as set forth further below. Vermonters shall significantly restrict normal activities outside the home or place of residence, consistent with CDC guidance, to help stop the spread of the virus.
2. As previously directed, all workers shall work remotely when possible.
3. Except as set forth below, effective Wednesday, March 25, 2020 at 5 p.m., subject to closures and limitations provided in prior orders, all businesses and not-for-profit entities in the state shall suspend in-person business operations. These businesses and not-for- profit entities are encouraged to develop business strategies, procedures and practices such as using an on-line presence, telephone and web-based service delivery and phone or on- line orders for curb-side pick-up and delivery.
The Vermont Agency of Commerce and Community Development (ACCD), shall develop a process for responding to questions regarding acceptable continuation of business operations.
4. All businesses, governmental entities and not-for-profit entities shall develop strategies, procedures and practices designed for strict adherence to CDC and VDH guidance to ensure recommended social distancing, including, to the extent possible:
a. maintaining a distance of 6 feet between persons;
b. requiring employees to practice appropriate hygiene measures, including regular,
thorough handwashing;
c. requiring employees who are sick remain home; and
d. regularly cleaning and disinfecting frequently touched objects and surfaces.
5. Businesses and entities providing services or functions deemed critical to public health and safety, as well as economic and national security shall remain in operation, and, except as set forth in Section 4 above, shall not be subject to the in-person restrictions set forth in Section 3.
6. Services or functions in Vermont deemed critical to public health and safety, as well as economic and national security include:
a. health care operations such as COVID-19 testing and clinical research, hospital personnel and other healthcare providers, public health workers and other healthcare service providers, laboratory services, caregivers, logistics, technology, security and custodial support, blood and plasma donors and mortuary services;

b. law enforcement, public safety and first responders, including fire, ambulance services, emergency medical technicians and emergency management personnel;
c. critical infrastructure including utilities, telecommunication, airports and transportation infrastructure;
d. construction necessary to support the COVID-19 response and maintain critical infrastructure;
e. critical manufacturing, including food and animal feed manufacturing, processing and supply, pharmaceuticals and other manufacturing necessary to support the COVID-19 response as well as economic and national security;
f. retail serving basic human needs such as grocery stores, pharmacies, other retail that sells food, beverage, animal feed and essential supplies, provided, these retail operations shall be conducted through on-line and telephone orders for delivery and curb-side pickup to the extent possible;
g. fuel products and supply;
h. hardware stores, provided, these retail operations shall be conducted through on-
line and telephone orders for delivery and curb-side pickup to the extent possible;
i. transportation sector and agricultural sector equipment parts, repair and
maintenance, provided these retail operations shall be conducted through on-line
and telephone orders for delivery and curb-side pickup to the extent possible;
j. trash collection and disposal, recycling and operations and maintenance of drinking
water and wastewater/drainage infrastructure;
k. agriculture and farms, animal shelters, production and delivery of seed, chemicals
and fertilizers, CSAs and veterinarians;
l. lodging, to the extent required to support COVID-19 response, critical
infrastructure and national security;
m. other building and property services for the safety, sanitation and operations of residences or other businesses;
n. mail and shipping services;
o. news media;
p. banks and related financial institutions, provided, however, routine retail banking
operations shall be limited to transactions conducted through automated teller
machines, drive-through services and online and telephone services;
q. providers of necessities and services to economically disadvantaged populations;
and
r. other vendors of technical, security, logistics, custodial and equipment repair and
maintenance services necessary to support the COVID-19 response, critical infrastructure and national security.
7. ACCD shall develop additional guidance as to which businesses are determined to be critical to public health and safety, as well as economic and national security.
Other businesses may be determined to be critical to public health and safety, as well as economic and national security after requesting an opinion from ACCD. ACCD shall consider:

• whether a business is necessary in order to properly respond to this emergency;
• whether a business transaction or the performance of services requires in-person
contact;
• implications for business operations in Vermont, taking into account the economic and societal impacts as well as supply chain dependencies that are geographically distributed; and
• such other factors as the Secretary of ACCD shall determine, in consultation with the Commissioner of the Department of Health and the Commissioner of Public Safety.
8. Essential state and local government functions will also remain open, including offices that provide essential government services.
Except as otherwise set forth herein, this Addendum to the Executive Order shall take effect upon signing and shall continue in full force and effect until April 15, 2020, at which time the Governor, in consultation with the Vermont Department of Health and Agency of Human Services, the Department of Public Safety/Division of Emergency Management shall assess the emergency and determine whether to amend or extend this Order.
  By the Governor:
_____________________________________ Brittney L. Wilson
Secretary of Civil and Military Affairs
Executive Order No. 01-20 – Addendum 6 Dated: March 24, 2020
________________________________ Philip B. Scott
Governor
 